[Amit Varma]: Before we move on with this episode of the Scene in the Unseen, do check out another
[Amit Varma]: awesome podcast from IVM Podcast, Cyrus Says, hosted by my old buddy, Cyrus Brochia.
[Amit Varma]: When it comes to economics, one of my complaints is that people think in zero sum ways. They
[Amit Varma]: assume that if someone wins something, someone else must lose. The rich can get rich only
[Amit Varma]: if the poor get poorer, and industrialists can only make money if poor workers down the
[Amit Varma]: line get exploited. This is why they feel, as Jawaharlal Nehru once said, that profit
[Amit Varma]: is a dirty word. The only solution to poverty, they think, is to redistribute from the poor
[Amit Varma]: to the rich. But the thing is, economies grow and societies prosper because the world works
[Amit Varma]: in a positive some way. Every voluntary transaction makes both parties better off. The writer
[Amit Varma]: John Stossel once called this the double thank you moment. When you buy a cup of coffee at
[Amit Varma]: a cafe, the guy at the counter says thank you when you hand over your money, and you
[Amit Varma]: say thank you when you receive the coffee. Both of you benefited, neither of you exploited
[Amit Varma]: the other.
[Amit Varma]: It strikes me that there is another field besides economics in which zero sum thinking
[Amit Varma]: is a mistake, and that is geopolitics. Except that in geopolitics there are both positive
[Amit Varma]: sum games and negative sum games. A negative sum game is one in which both parties lose.
[Amit Varma]: And a particularly bad kind of negative sum game is one in which both parties get trapped
[Amit Varma]: in a spiral where every action makes both parties worse off, but each is forced to stay
[Amit Varma]: in the game. There is no way out.
[Amit Varma]: Is the conflict between India and Pakistan like this? It's clear to me that there's
[Amit Varma]: no easy way out of this conflict. It's also clear to me that most ways out will make the
[Amit Varma]: situation worse, not better, for both parties. But doing nothing is also not an option. How
[Amit Varma]: did we get here? What can we do to get out of here? Is there anything we can do to get
[Amit Varma]: out of here?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. Today's subject is the conflict between India and
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan and my guest is a historian and analyst, Srinath Raghavan. Srinath is both a historian
[Amit Varma]: and a foreign policy analyst. He's been on the show before and his books are linked on
[Amit Varma]: the episode page. Before I begin my conversation with him though, let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more. Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use. These include wearable
[Amit Varma]: art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and table runners, and accessories
[Amit Varma]: like tote bags. This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at
[Amit Varma]: an accessible price and artists get royalties on sale, just like authors do. What's more,
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products including fridge magnets with
[Amit Varma]: some stunning motifs and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood. Their artists include
[Amit Varma]: luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vasvo x Vasvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti Nelson
[Amit Varma]: and Pradeep Mishra. They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even
[Amit Varma]: if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU. And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20. That's
[Amit Varma]: IVM for IVM podcast. IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Srinath, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Good to be here. We are recording this on
[Amit Varma]: March 8, which is a Friday and this episode releases on March 11, which is a Monday. So
[Amit Varma]: if anything happens on the weekend, we are not to blame for it. So Srinath, what do you
[Guest]: make of the situation right now? Well, at this point of time, it does seem
[Guest]: like the situation has calmed down. The immediate crisis at hand because of the fallout of the
[Guest]: Pulwama attacks, at least the military dimension of it in terms of active operations, etc.
[Guest]: has been curtailed. The Indian government has stated quite explicitly that, you know,
[Guest]: operations are sort of at an end and that diplomatic action will continue. But this
[Guest]: is very much an evolving situation in a sense that the next crisis is only as far away as
[Guest]: the next terrorist attack is. And I say this with more than a hint of trepidation in my
[Guest]: voice, because the next time around, I think it can be a lot more dangerous as a result
[Amit Varma]: of what has happened this time around. In case any listener is binging on the show
[Amit Varma]: in the year 2023 and just wants a little perspective on what's happened so far, there was an attack
[Amit Varma]: in Pulwama, where around 40 people died. And after that, India responded with a surgical
[Amit Varma]: airstrike, the results of which are debated, but there definitely was a surgical airstrike.
[Amit Varma]: And after which there was an air skirmish the next day where India claimed that we had
[Amit Varma]: downed an F-16, but there's no evidence of that yet at the time of speaking. And they
[Amit Varma]: captured one of our pilots who was then released. And that kind of seemed to give both sides
[Amit Varma]: a way out of the situation where Pakistan could say, look, we want peace and we're releasing
[Amit Varma]: the guy and India could say that, look, they gave the guy back because we are so strong
[Amit Varma]: and we've done the surgical strike and we don't need to do any more. Is that how you
[Amit Varma]: look at it?
[Guest]: Well, yes, I think at this point of time, both sides have enough to claim victory. And
[Guest]: in as much as that allows them to sort of back off from a further spiral of escalation
[Guest]: and another round of military action. I think that's a good thing. And of course, a lot
[Guest]: depends on how domestic audiences in both countries will receive the sort of, you know,
[Guest]: established narratives of what has happened in this context. And in as much as diplomatic
[Guest]: action is now going to be foregrounded and there are going to be things like listing
[Guest]: of Masood Azhar in the sort of United Nations list of terrorists and so on. There will be
[Guest]: other kinds of diplomatic pressure that will be built up on Pakistan, the financial action
[Guest]: task force and other avenues. So the sort of India's struggle against terrorism continues.
[Guest]: But I think it's safe to say that for the time being, the military dimension of it takes
[Guest]: a bit of a backseat, but it remains latent. I mean, and that provides the background context
[Guest]: against which many further diplomatic and other options will be exercised.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I want to come back to the current situation at the end of this episode, because what I
[Amit Varma]: was hoping our conversation would do and which is why I invited you is, I wanted to get a
[Amit Varma]: better sense of the history of the conflict and also kind of sharpen the lens through
[Amit Varma]: which to view it. What are the strategic imperatives? What are the political imperatives? What,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how does one really view it? What are the options open to both parties and so
[Amit Varma]: on? Where do we start? I mean, obviously, we can just go a long way back to forever.
[Amit Varma]: But if we talk about specifically cross-border terrorism supported by Pakistan, you know,
[Amit Varma]: where should we start when we think about it?
[Guest]: I think a good starting point would be the late 1980s. Because that's the time when obviously
[Guest]: the insurgency in Kashmir really kicks off. And that insurgency then gives Pakistan and
[Guest]: its inter-services intelligence an opportunity to really find another way of inflicting further
[Guest]: pain on India, challenge its control and hold over Jammu and Kashmir. But we should remember
[Guest]: that 1980s was also an important point of time in the sort of nuclear history of the
[Guest]: subcontinent. That is the time at which the Indian government more or less came to some
[Guest]: firm conclusions that the Pakistani nuclear program, which was a covert one, had actually
[Guest]: sort of developed considerably by that point of time. Again, it's worth recalling that,
[Guest]: you know, in the early 1980s, when Pakistan was very actively supporting the sort of,
[Guest]: you know, operations against the Red Army in Afghanistan by through the Mujahideen and
[Guest]: so on. That was also the period when the United States, the Reagan administration turned a
[Guest]: blind eye to many bits and pieces of evidence that were emerging about Pakistan's pursuit
[Guest]: of a covert nuclear program. In fact, we have evidence about how the Reagan administration
[Guest]: willingly turned a blind eye to many very strong irrefutable pieces of evidence that
[Guest]: Pakistan was actually pursuing a covert nuclear option and that it was being supported by
[Guest]: China in different ways, perhaps to the extent of carrying out a test for Pakistan on a Chinese
[Guest]: site. So by the late 1980s, the Indians are pretty sure that the Pakistani nuclear program
[Guest]: is pretty well advanced. It is in that context that India also decides then to start thinking
[Guest]: about weaponization of its own program. We had demonstrated capability as far back as
[Guest]: 1974, but had desisted from any move towards weaponization in the next, you know, decade
[Guest]: and a half and that begins to change. So the late 1980s, therefore, seems to me to be the
[Guest]: right starting point because that's the time when this kind of combination of insurgency
[Guest]: and terrorism as a tool being used by Pakistan, along with unrest in Kashmir and Pakistan's
[Guest]: possession of some kind of, you know, strong nuclear capability actually comes together.
[Guest]: And it is the fusion of these that allows Pakistan to continue to build up its support
[Guest]: for insurgency because now it believes that it has a nuclear shield, which will deter
[Guest]: India from carrying out any major conventional operations. I mean, just to give you an example,
[Guest]: if you go back to the 1965 war, that was a war which also began because of Pakistani
[Guest]: support for insurgents or attempt to infiltrate people into Kashmir and so on. But what was
[Guest]: the Indian response? It was very quickly to strike across the line of control. When the
[Guest]: Pakistanis responded by carrying out a conventional military attack on Akhnur, India responded
[Guest]: by opening up the Punjab front, right? So you could escalate and demonstrate your conventional
[Guest]: superiority because you are the more powerful country in a conventional sense. But once
[Guest]: the Pakistanis possessed some kind of nuclear capability, even if it was shadowy, even if
[Guest]: it was not demonstrated, but more importantly, once India knew that Pakistan had that capability
[Guest]: and Pakistan knew that India knew, then the Pakistani strategy is to say that India's
[Guest]: conventional superiority is now going to be negated by this nuclear shield that we have
[Guest]: acquired. So that then allows them to believe that they can continue to use subconventional
[Guest]: means like insurgency and terrorism to impose costs on India without having to fear a retaliatory
[Guest]: response by the Indians. And that really is the dilemma with which we are still grappling.
[Guest]: So in that sense, the late 1980s may be a useful starting point.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a step back to a period you're very familiar with. In fact, the Bangladesh
[Amit Varma]: war, which ends in 71 and we recorded an episode about this last week, but it airs two weeks
[Amit Varma]: later on March 25th. But regardless of that, so it's after 1971 when Pakistan lose and
[Amit Varma]: they're humiliated because, you know, the country is basically torn into two. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: they lose East Pakistan as it were, which is when they make the turn towards nuclear.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, my question there is, what does Pakistan want? What are its long term aims
[Amit Varma]: against India? How does it look at South Asia? How does it look at itself?
[Guest]: Well, at one level, Pakistan's long term aim has been to sort of challenge India's control
[Guest]: over Jammu and Kashmir, which it believes as a Muslim majority province should have
[Guest]: rightly sort of joined Pakistan at the time of partition and independence. And because
[Guest]: it did not, they have, you know, successively at various points of time, attempted to use
[Guest]: force in order to wrest control of Kashmir from India. You saw that happening in October
[Guest]: 1947. In fact, even before Kashmir had formally joined India, you saw that happening in 1965.
[Guest]: We've, you know, seen that happening through the course of the insurgency, which began
[Guest]: in the late 1980s. So Pakistan's aims have been consistent. It is a territorially revisionist
[Guest]: power, which wants a piece of territory which is disputed between India and Pakistan to
[Amit Varma]: be entirely under its control.
[Amit Varma]: But is it also the case that, I mean, the military is dominant then, is it also the
[Amit Varma]: case that the incentives of the army are such that they want to keep Kashmir on the boil
[Amit Varma]: and they want to keep this conflict going. So that is where they get their power from.
[Amit Varma]: And it could therefore be said that their actions and their focus on Kashmir is a consequence
[Amit Varma]: of this. And they don't necessarily care about Kashmir per se, like in the same way that
[Amit Varma]: within India, for example, a lot of people who make noises about cow slaughter don't
[Amit Varma]: really care about cows. It's a proxy for the bigotry. So in that sense, is Kashmir a proxy
[Amit Varma]: for the military's need to keep the conflict bubbling over?
[Guest]: Well, yes, in the sense that you could make an argument that Kashmir comes very handy
[Guest]: to the Pakistan army to sort of talk about this, you know, threat from India to the existence
[Guest]: of Pakistan and the need to recuperate Pakistan's sort of national territory, which they believe
[Guest]: encompasses Kashmir, at least the Kashmir Valley and so on. And that then gives the
[Guest]: Pakistan army a stronger handle with which to fight out various kinds of institutional
[Guest]: battles and cement its own position within the Pakistani state and society at large.
[Guest]: But at the same time, it's worth remembering that the Kashmir dispute in some ways predates
[Guest]: the rise to prominence of the, so historically, it's not accurate to say that this was a dispute
[Guest]: which was invented by the Pakistan army. In fact, the decision to send the first round
[Guest]: of irregulars in October 1947, was taken at the time when Jinnah was the governor general.
[Guest]: And he knew quite well, and this is well established in historical records, that he knew that this
[Guest]: operation was being prepared and that the Pakistani state was supporting it. So in a
[Guest]: sense, there is a longer term sort of question about Pakistan's, you know, sense of nationalism,
[Guest]: its rivalry with India, which is crystallized in the Kashmir conflict. And the Pakistan
[Guest]: army, of course, sees Kashmir as a raison d'etre for its own existence, and which allows
[Guest]: it to continually accrue power within their system.
[Amit Varma]: So it kind of works both ways. So coming on to the 80s, so what's really happened is that
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan makes a determined move to become a nuclear power post 71. And India also sort
[Amit Varma]: of flirts with it. And already there is sort of a dynamic developing where Pakistan looks
[Amit Varma]: at the nuclear option as a military necessity, where India seems to look at the nuclear option
[Amit Varma]: more as a strategic necessity, you know, for deterrence and so on, and isn't actually thinking
[Amit Varma]: of using it on the battlefield. Is that correct?
[Guest]: Well, yes, which is why, you know, from the time that Indians do the first nuclear test
[Guest]: 1974, which incidentally is built, you know, it is euphemistically called a peaceful nuclear
[Guest]: explosion. Now, let's remember that there was a category of nuclear explosions, which
[Guest]: were called PNEs back in the day, and India invoked that category. So it's not like we
[Guest]: sort of conjured it up out of thin air. It was an available sort of way of describing
[Guest]: these activities. And we chose to do that. But what is also interesting, and this is
[Guest]: now reasonably well established in the sort of work which has been done on the nuclear
[Guest]: history of India, is that India did not really think actively of weaponization of the nuclear
[Guest]: thing. Because I think, as you're suggesting, the assumption always was that, you know,
[Guest]: we needed nuclear weapons or the kind of capability to sort of acquire nuclear weapons, primarily
[Guest]: as a way of demonstrating our political sort of resolve against any attempts at coercion
[Guest]: in the nuclear domain. So right, so you had important adversaries like China, which had
[Guest]: acquired nuclear weapons, you knew that Pakistan was acquiring, in the 1971 context, you had
[Guest]: the United States sending in the Seventh Fleet, which had nuclear weapons on board, to the
[Guest]: Bay of Bengal, and so on. So in a sense, nuclear weapons and demonstrating that capability
[Guest]: was seen basically as a way of telling others that India would not back down in the face
[Guest]: of any kind of overt or covert threat of nuclear coercion, right. So it's that really. So in
[Guest]: that sense, it is more at a strategic political level that India was thinking about it. Whereas
[Guest]: for Pakistan, you know, the capability, and then even the moment at which they chose to
[Guest]: sort of start developing that capability, really reflected their lopsided conventional
[Guest]: military balance with India, right. The Bangladesh war really brings it to the fore. Not only
[Guest]: do you lose half of the country, and in some ways, the more populous half, but you have
[Guest]: 93,000 Pakistani soldiers in Indian custody. It is a very starkly humiliating sort of moment,
[Guest]: which exposes Pakistan's conventional military inferiority vis-a-vis India. And in that sense,
[Guest]: they always see nuclear weapons as a way of compensating for that conventional imbalance
[Amit Varma]: of power with India.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say the quality of your nuclear capabilities to some extent, driven by these
[Amit Varma]: imperatives, like Pakistan's imperative is to actually have nuclear weapons they can
[Amit Varma]: use in a variety of different situations, tactically on the battlefield or otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: and so on. While for India, what is important is to have nuclear weapons, so as to be able
[Amit Varma]: to signal credibly that they are nuclear power. And does that then impact the intensity with
[Amit Varma]: which you pursue building an actual nuclear arsenal?
[Guest]: Well, yes, but even in the case of Pakistan, these are things which happen only over a
[Guest]: period of time, right? Because till such time you have covert capabilities, or you do not
[Guest]: declare yourself and what nuclear weapons state, it becomes difficult to then, you know,
[Guest]: try out a range of other things without others picking up on what your actions are. So in
[Guest]: that sense, it's only in the post 1998 phase that Pakistan also starts thinking about how
[Guest]: to make these nuclear weapons kind of more integrated with conventional sort of, you
[Guest]: know, military power, not necessarily in terms of deploying them for, you know, for actual
[Guest]: military use. But how do you use that in ways that will negate India's conventional superiority,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So that design is there in the mind, but it's only in the post 1998 phase that the Pakistanis
[Guest]: really start seeing it. But what is interesting is that even before Pakistan overtly sort
[Guest]: of does its nuclear tests in 1998, they are already aware of the fact that Indians are
[Guest]: aware of this, and then use that to push in more insurgency, terrorism in the context
[Guest]: of Jammu and Kashmir, but also in other parts of India in that period. Of course, it is
[Guest]: a context in Jammu and Kashmir, which kind of allows them to sort of do it. But the fact
[Guest]: that they are able to leverage that context is in some ways unthinkable without the presence
[Guest]: of some kind of even covert nuclear capability in that early stage.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we go on to discuss nuclear deterrence in detail and how it evolved and
[Amit Varma]: so on, tell me a little bit about deterrence per se. What are the different kinds of deterrence?
[Guest]: Well, the word deterrence comes from the verb deter, which means to sort of stop someone
[Guest]: from doing something that someone wants to do, right. So the way we think about deterrence
[Guest]: is typically that you think about it in terms of deterrence by way of threatening prospective
[Guest]: punishment, right. I mean, think about any day to day circumstance, you know, I have
[Guest]: young kids, right. So how do I tell my kids not to do something is by saying, if you do
[Guest]: that, then this is the punishment that you will get, you know, you will be sort of grounded
[Guest]: for a week or something to that effect, right. I mean, in back in the day, parents used to
[Guest]: actually give it to you. I hope they are listening to this. Do they listen to my podcast?
[Guest]: Yeah. So, so, you know, back in the day, when I was growing up, parents had stronger ways
[Guest]: of deterring you by giving you a, you know, a few tight whacks. I suppose we are, you
[Guest]: know, at a level of civilization where those things are at least not to be talked about
[Guest]: on podcasts. So, but that is a standard way of thinking about, right. So you, you, you,
[Guest]: you change someone's behavior or by telling them not to do something by threatening prospective
[Guest]: punishment. Now, there is another way of thinking about it, which is not just about punishment,
[Guest]: but which is what you call deterrence by denial, right. Let me give you another example, which
[Guest]: will sort of crystallize this. Now, how do you think about preventing a thief from entering
[Guest]: your house? So one way of doing it is to say that, listen, we have law, which says anyone
[Guest]: who tries to break into someone else's house, if he's caught, will be sort of punished for
[Guest]: so many years, right. So that is a classic case of deterrence by punishment. You have
[Guest]: law on the statute books, you have courts, you have the police, then whole enforcement
[Guest]: machinery precisely to deter people. The idea is not so much to punish someone who's been
[Guest]: caught. The idea is to deter those who may be thinking of such actions in the future.
[Guest]: That is what deterrence by punishment is a classic example. But another way of thinking
[Guest]: about the same problem, how to prevent the thief from entering your house, is to say,
[Guest]: I am going to construct a 15 to 20 feet wall all around my house. I'm going to put an electricity
[Guest]: sort of driven fence all around it. So every thief will know that it's actually next to
[Guest]: impossible to break into this house. That changes his decision calculus about whether
[Guest]: he should even try it or not. That is called deterrence by denial, right. So another way
[Guest]: of thinking about this distinction is to say that, you know, all forms of deterrence aim
[Guest]: to influence the cost benefit calculations of whoever is your target, right, whose behavior
[Guest]: you want to change. Now, deterrence by punishment goes after the cost side of the equation because
[Guest]: you're telling him or her that if you do this, then you're going to incur costs by way of
[Guest]: my punishment. Yeah. But another way of thinking about it is to say that you go after the benefit
[Guest]: sides of the equation by telling the other person that you won't, in the first instance,
[Guest]: be able to pocket the benefits of whatever it is that you want to do, right. So that
[Guest]: is called deterrence by denial, right. So deterrence works by punishment and by denial.
[Guest]: These are not mutually exclusive, but there is one salient distinction. Deterrence by
[Guest]: punishment is typically easier and less costly to execute, whereas deterrence by denial is
[Guest]: more expensive. Just go back to the example of the thief, right? If I rely on the law
[Guest]: and, you know, the threat of prospective punishment, do I need to do very much? Not. But if I want
[Guest]: to build a fence and you want to put up walls, I've got to fork out money, right? So deterrence
[Guest]: by denial is the stronger form of deterrence, but it's also the one which is more costly
[Amit Varma]: for you to implement. So in the context of your kids, if you don't want them to watch
[Amit Varma]: too much TV, deterrence by punishment would be to tell them that, listen, you know, no
[Amit Varma]: dinner for you or too tight wax if you watch like TV beyond 9pm. And deterrence by denial
[Amit Varma]: would be not having a television set at home, which is very costly for you because you yourself
[Guest]: like television, right?
[Guest]: And which is my preferred way of deterring them from watching television. I've not had
[Guest]: the privilege of having a television set at home for maybe eight years now.
[Amit Varma]: There you go. And I don't watch news television either. But what does one do about football?
[Amit Varma]: Well, you could argue there is Hotstar. Right. So we'll come back to deterrence by denial
[Amit Varma]: later. But just talking about deterrence by punishment, once Pakistan kind of goes nuclear
[Amit Varma]: and once India goes in that direction as well, through the 80s and up to 98, it's basically
[Amit Varma]: deterrence by punishment. And it's basically nuclear deterrence where you are either you're
[Amit Varma]: threatening to go nuclear or anything else you threaten isn't effective because the other
[Amit Varma]: side can go nuclear and therefore there's not much you can do at all. And you pointed
[Amit Varma]: me to this excellent paper by Vipin Narang, which is linked on my episode page, which
[Amit Varma]: kind of talks about the different levels of deterrence and especially why Pakistan is
[Amit Varma]: able to deter India, but India is not able to deter Pakistan. And what I learned from
[Amit Varma]: that was what Narang calls the posture, the nuclear posture of each country of Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: rather changed from 86 to 98. Tell me a little bit more about the different kinds of deterrence
[Guest]: and how 98 changed the dynamic. Well, I think it's important in the first instance to point
[Guest]: out quite clearly what is it that India wants to deter and what is it that Pakistan wants
[Guest]: to deter. Right. Because those are kind of two different things, even though the issues
[Guest]: and what are the instruments in play are somewhat similar. Right. From the Indian perspective,
[Guest]: the first instance you want to deter the use of any nuclear weapons by a state like Pakistan
[Guest]: or any other state against India in any context. So there you have a posture of sort of declared
[Guest]: nuclear policy of massive retaliation. You say that, listen, if you are going to use
[Guest]: force against us, we are going to hit you so hard and punish you so much that it's not
[Guest]: even going to be worthwhile for you to have initiated this action in the first place.
[Guest]: Right. So, so that is a very clear strategy of deterrence by punishment, but which is
[Guest]: aimed at the nuclear use. But there is another level at which you want deterrence to operate,
[Guest]: which is to say that you want to deter Pakistan or the terrorist groups which are striking
[Guest]: you from carrying out these terrorist strikes against you. Now, if you want to deter that,
[Guest]: then frankly, the nuclear deterrence angle does not really come into play because what
[Guest]: you have to have the capability there is in the first instance to either punish Pakistan
[Guest]: and the terrorist organizations which are striking against you, or to be able to create
[Guest]: systems which will deny them the opportunity to be able to carry out those attacks in the
[Guest]: first place. Right. So there you need either denial or punishment. And, and that's a different
[Guest]: kind of a level at which you are looking to do deterrence. Now, how does it work from
[Guest]: Pakistani side? Right. From Pakistan's point of view, they know that India, because of
[Guest]: its conventional superiority is unlikely to be using nuclear weapons in the first instance.
[Guest]: So their nuclear weapons really are aimed against deterring India from bringing to bear
[Guest]: its conventional superiority against Pakistan in any context. Now, that context could be
[Guest]: that of terrorism, right? So you have a major terrorist attack. India sort of cannot respond
[Guest]: with a major use of its conventional force, say in the way that it did in 1965, hypothetically,
[Guest]: because it should then fear that this conflict will escalate to the nuclear level. It could
[Guest]: invoke, it could sort of push Pakistan to use its nuclear weapons in order to deter
[Guest]: a conventional use of force by India. Right. So for the Pakistani nuclear weapons, therefore,
[Guest]: are basically a way of negating India's conventional superiority, and then allowing them to continue
[Guest]: to impose costs on India by subconventional means, by which we mean insurgency and terrorism.
[Guest]: But putting India in this bind of saying, listen, you have to absorb these costs, but
[Guest]: you cannot punish us in any significant way, because that punishment then carries the risk
[Guest]: of escalating to a nuclear conflict of some kind. And that is the way in which the Pakistani
[Guest]: strategy of deterrence really operates. Right. And what Narang tries to tell in his paper
[Guest]: is really about how the Pakistani posture has kind of evolved in the period after the
[Guest]: Pakistani sort of nuclear tests of 1998, and also in response to various kinds of actions
[Guest]: that India has taken. Right. So in that sense, I think the key thing for us to remember is
[Guest]: that, you know, nuclear deterrence or normal deterrence is like any strategic situation.
[Guest]: Yeah, strategy, the essence of strategy really is interdependent decision making. The decisions
[Guest]: that you want to make depends on the decision that the other side is going to make and vice
[Guest]: versa. Right. So in that sense, it's a constantly evolving iterative game that continues over
[Guest]: a period of time, which is why game theory provides a very good basic template within
[Amit Varma]: which to think about strategic situations. And are we disadvantaged by the fact that
[Amit Varma]: because of our rational posturing, and I know first use doctrine and so on, that our actions,
[Amit Varma]: our reactions have so far been relatively predictable, while the Pakistanis have been
[Amit Varma]: relatively unpredictable in the sense we don't really know how they will respond. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: whenever we respond to a provocation from them, we tend to play it as safe as we can,
[Amit Varma]: because hey, what if they go nuclear, while in their case, they can do a lot of things
[Amit Varma]: with impunity, because you know, they know there's a no first news here, they know that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we are also at some level wary of that kind of escalation, does that matter?
[Guest]: Well, the first thing is to point out the reasons for India's adoption of the no first
[Guest]: use policy, right. So the NFU posture was adopted or announced by the Vajpayee government
[Guest]: soon after the nuclear tests. And the reason that, you know, sort of we kind of adopted
[Guest]: that posture over a period of time, and then it was kind of, you know, codified in a doctrine
[Guest]: and so on, was primarily to demonstrate that India is not looking to use nuclear weapons
[Guest]: in any kind of military, you know, operational context at all, but that we are primarily
[Guest]: looking at it as a device to prevent the use of nuclear weapons as tools of coercion by
[Guest]: anyone else. So from that perspective, we saw it simply as a deterrent to against the
[Guest]: use of nuclear weapons by any other state. Right now, there has been a lot of criticism
[Guest]: over the years saying that India is, you know, unnecessarily tying its hands because the
[Guest]: NFU posture then allows Pakistan to sort of do a range of things without India being able
[Guest]: to invoke its nuclear weapons. But there is a flip side to it. And I think that argument
[Guest]: is kind of worth taking on board, which is to say that if India abandons its no first
[Guest]: use policy, or let's say it never had a no first use policy, if it had a policy saying,
[Guest]: we reserve the right to use whatever capabilities that we have, depending on our assessment
[Guest]: of what the nature of the threat to India is, then you have to understand that as the
[Guest]: smaller of the two states, Pakistan will be concerned that India may actually use its
[Guest]: nuclear weapons in a first use mode, a first strike, really to take out Pakistani nuclear
[Guest]: capability, because that then neutralizes Pakistan's nuclear capability, and allows
[Guest]: India to bring its conventional superiority to bear. Right. So that is the way if you
[Guest]: are a rational actor, you would imagine that the way India would be thinking about it is
[Guest]: to say that, hey, we have nuclear weapons, let's use these to take out the Pakistani
[Guest]: nukes. Once the Pakistani nukes are gone, we are back to the pre nuclear age, where
[Guest]: it's just the conventional superiority of India, which will kick in. And from Pakistan's
[Guest]: perspective, that then brings about what, you know, nuclear deterrence or scholars of
[Guest]: nuclear weapons call a use it or lose it dilemma. So the fear of a first strike could then actually
[Guest]: catalyze them to sort of think about using it very early on in any crisis, rather than
[Guest]: having a restraint, right. So in a sense, India's NFU posture actually allows these
[Guest]: crises not from escalating very quickly. So I think that is a very important part of what
[Guest]: the NFU brings to the table. And I think it's worth remembering that, because at the end
[Guest]: of the day, the problem that India has been confronting for the last 30 years from Pakistan,
[Guest]: fundamentally, is at the level of subconventional threats. And whether nuclear first use against
[Guest]: Pakistan is the proportionate response to that, it's inconceivable that India or any
[Guest]: decision makers sitting in New Delhi will actually assume that nuking Pakistan is the
[Guest]: response to their support for terrorism of whatever scale or magnitude, right.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, our abandoning the first use doctrine would make first use more likely
[Guest]: by them. Exactly. I think it will make for much greater
[Guest]: degrees of instability. And it can be a very worrying proposition. We have already seen
[Guest]: that Pakistan has kind of developed, you know, sort of these tactical nuclear weapons, which
[Guest]: they have sort of devolved down the chain of command, primarily because they believe
[Guest]: India is trying to develop other forms of, you know, conventional capabilities, which
[Guest]: you can bring to bear very quickly, what used to be called the cold start doctrine, and
[Guest]: so on, which the Pakistanis believe have to be deterred, right. And in that sense, if
[Guest]: we say that, listen, we are going to bring about a degree of ambiguity in this domain,
[Guest]: I think that will have consequences of instability. In fact, there is a new paper, which is an
[Guest]: even more interesting paper by Vipin Narang and Chris Clary, which has just come out even
[Guest]: literally in the last couple of weeks, where they make an interesting argument saying,
[Guest]: why is it that India constantly talks about saying that we need to abandon this NFU? You
[Guest]: know, is India really moving towards a counterforce kind of strategy, which is saying we are developing
[Guest]: a nuclear strategy, which aims at taking out Pakistani nuclear weapons? Now, if that is
[Guest]: indeed true, then that could introduce very dangerous dynamics very early on in any crisis
[Amit Varma]: between India and Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And just to summarise sort of Narang's thesis on how Pakistan's approach changed because
[Amit Varma]: of India going nuclear in 98 was, he talks about three kinds of nuclear postures that
[Amit Varma]: you can have the catalytic, the assured retaliation, and asymmetric escalation. Assured retaliation
[Amit Varma]: is basically what India and China do, which is the no first use doctrine. Catalytic is
[Amit Varma]: what according to him, Pakistan did between 86 and 98, which is basically, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: are trying to catalyse a third party into intervening. For example, what Israel did
[Amit Varma]: during the Yom Kippur War in 1973 was exactly this, where they showed that they were mobilising
[Amit Varma]: nuclear weapons so that the US would intervene, and not necessarily to use the weapons per
[Amit Varma]: se. And in both the brass tacks crisis of 1986, and then the Kashmir crisis of 1990,
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan postured in a catalytic way about its nuclear weaponry so that the US would
[Amit Varma]: intervene at a diplomatic level, which they succeeded in doing. But otherwise, Narang
[Amit Varma]: says India was not actually going to be deterred. And therefore, it wasn't effective. And what
[Amit Varma]: changed with 98 was that because India had gone nuclear to counter that they shifted
[Amit Varma]: from catalytic to asymmetric escalation, which is basically you are saying that we will use
[Amit Varma]: it at any point in time, we'll use it on the battlefield, we'll use it as a tactical thing,
[Amit Varma]: we are unpredictable. And the term he used about that strategy was deterrent optimal,
[Amit Varma]: which is that, you know, because Pakistan is doing asymmetric escalation, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: posturing that we will use it at any point in time, and India is saying we won't be the
[Amit Varma]: first to use it, it automatically gives them an advantage over us in the sense that they
[Amit Varma]: can continue doing subconventional, or, you know, supporting cross border terrorism, basically,
[Amit Varma]: with impunity, knowing that any escalation that we carry out has a threat of nuclear
[Amit Varma]: escalation. So I think it's in response to this that some people often say that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: we should leave the no first use doctrine.
[Guest]: Yeah, as I said, I mean, the leaving out the no first use will introduce more dangerous
[Guest]: dynamics in any India Pakistan crisis, in ways that may not necessarily be beneficial
[Guest]: to India, there is no reason for India to adopt a crisis posture, which will somehow
[Guest]: give incentives for the Pakistanis to think that the best thing is for them to use nuclear
[Guest]: weapons early on, why would we do it? It's suicidal to think that that's in any way a
[Guest]: strategically wise move. So to that extent, I don't think that's there. But there are
[Guest]: other options that India has been sort of exploring. And in some ways, you know, you
[Guest]: could think about the evolution of Indian strategy towards Pakistan, as primarily a
[Guest]: search for usable options between the sort of conventional and nuclear realm, in order
[Guest]: to deter Pakistan's subconventional activities, right, which is to say that, listen, the Pakistanis
[Guest]: keep saying that we have these red lines that, you know, we can sort of go asymmetric very
[Guest]: soon. But actually speaking, if they are a rational actor, they cannot want a nuclear
[Guest]: exchange with India either. Because, you know, India will survive, but Pakistan cannot survive
[Guest]: a massive retaliation by India, right. That is the premise of India's nuclear deterrent.
[Guest]: So when the Pakistanis are suggesting that, you know, the nuclear threshold is actually
[Guest]: here, it is not there. And the challenge for Indian strategy, therefore, is to explore
[Guest]: what is the space between conventional and nuclear, where force can be brought to bear
[Guest]: effectively to deter Pakistan's support of subconventional options, right. And so if
[Guest]: you think about, you know, when the 1998 nuclear test happened, India was the first one to
[Guest]: test. Then Indian Home Minister LK Advani said, I believe in Parliament, that, you know,
[Guest]: now India will start pursuing options like hot pursuit of terrorists across the line
[Guest]: of control. Because he believed that now that India had gone overtly nuclear, you know,
[Guest]: it had the sort of ability to, you know, put Pakistan on the mat. But once Pakistanis got
[Guest]: their own nuclear tests in a reciprocal way, then Indian decision makers had to become
[Guest]: a lot more cautious. So, a year down the line, or almost a year down the line, when you had
[Guest]: the sort of Kargil conflict happening, which was basically an attempt by Pakistanis to
[Guest]: grab territory on the Indian side of the line of control in the Kargil area, the government
[Guest]: of India responded by significant use of force, but ensured that that use of force was contained
[Guest]: to evicting Pakistanis who had come on the Indian side of the line of control. Even the
[Guest]: use of air power at that point of time was restricted to striking on Pakistanis who were
[Guest]: on the Indian side of the line of control. We did not want to say strike Pakistani logistical
[Guest]: lines or supply lines on the other side. And, you know, in fact, in his memoir on the Kargil
[Guest]: war, the then Army Chief General VP Malik says that the air chief at that point of time
[Guest]: pointed out that if we are going to use air power, then it can lead to escalation. And
[Guest]: the political leadership of the time, which is Prime Minister Vajpayee, took a conscious
[Guest]: decision that India should not cross the line of control, and that operations have to be
[Guest]: carried out on the Pakistanis on this side of the line of control. And again, the reason
[Guest]: for that was precisely because you wanted to use force in order to evict the Pakistanis,
[Guest]: but you did not want to use force in ways that would lead to further escalation towards
[Guest]: the sort of nuclear realm. So, in a sense, you are finding that space.
[Guest]: In fact, after the Kargil war, then Defence Minister George Fernandes gave a speech, where
[Guest]: he sort of pointedly said that the Kargil war has demonstrated that there is space between
[Guest]: the conventional and the nuclear realm, where India can use force in order to bring things
[Guest]: to bear. But of course, you know, using force on the scale of things of Kargil with the
[Guest]: degree of restraint was only possible because of the peculiar sort of nature of that conflict,
[Guest]: which was about Pakistanis doing a land grab on the Indian side of the line of control,
[Guest]: right. But the problem of terrorism still proved quite difficult to crack. So, for instance,
[Guest]: in the period after the nuclear tests and the Kargil conflict, you had a fairly sort
[Guest]: of intense period where India was using various kinds of conventional means to deter Pakistani
[Guest]: support for infiltration of terrorism across the line of control, right. So, you sort of
[Guest]: hit them very hard with artillery weapons, constant small arms firing, even actions across
[Guest]: the line of control, right, by what were sort of informally called, you know, BATs. So,
[Guest]: you know, you would sort of go across, hit them, punish them, and tell them that listen,
[Guest]: supporting infiltration from this sector is not a cost free option for you, right. So,
[Guest]: that was one way of doing it. But when you had a significant terrorist strike, like what
[Guest]: happened in by way of the attack on Parliament in India in December 2001, then the government
[Guest]: felt that, you know, you had to respond much more strongly. But once again, you felt that
[Guest]: air power was not possibly the best way of doing it. And then you mobilise the all your
[Guest]: armed forces, threaten Pakistan with a serious strike. But once the Pakistanis counter mobilised,
[Guest]: and once the rest of the international community got into the action, you very quickly realised
[Guest]: that carrying out major conventional operations against Pakistan would be very risky.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Musharraf explicitly said that our response to escalation may not be conventional
[Guest]: alone.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Explicitly threatened.
[Guest]: So, for Pakistan, it makes sense for them to sort of try and negate India's conventional
[Guest]: superiority, right. So, so the search for the space between the conventional and the
[Guest]: nuclear realm, where India could effectively use force to deter terrorism, continues after
[Guest]: the 2001 crisis. That is when you come up with this whole concept of something called
[Guest]: Cold Start, which has never been formally sort of accepted by the Indian government.
[Guest]: But broadly speaking, the idea was that one of the major problems in the 2001-2002 crisis
[Guest]: was that it took about three weeks before your entire armed forces could be mobilised,
[Guest]: particularly a strike course, which are capable of carrying out, you know, serious offensive
[Guest]: operations and imposing costs on Pakistan.
[Guest]: So, you came up with this idea that it would be good to have, you know, formations which
[Guest]: are capable of hitting across, maybe capturing some territory, imposing costs on the Pakistan
[Guest]: army, but which did not require this kind of long gestation period of mobilisation and
[Guest]: so on. So, it would be a cold, a standing start or a cold start was the way that you
[Guest]: were thinking. But the Pakistani response to that was to then say that, you know, we
[Guest]: are going to then lower the sort of nuclear threshold by a developing nuclear weapons,
[Guest]: which can be used in more sort of practical ways, i.e. in an operational battlefield kind
[Guest]: of context, and by devolving some of these sort of weapons further down the chain of
[Guest]: command, right. So, you increase the risks of nuclear escalation for India.
[Guest]: So, if India is going to think about saying that, listen, okay, we are going to send our
[Guest]: armoured formation or whatever cold start kind of operation across. And when we are
[Guest]: on their side of the international boundary or line of control, the Pakistanis use a tactical
[Guest]: nuclear weapon, what are you going to do? Because they have used nuclear weapons in
[Guest]: response to a conventional operation by you on their own territory, right. That then puts
[Guest]: you in a great dilemma of saying, are you going to respond now really by that massive
[Guest]: retaliation strike that you promised?
[Guest]: Because there's an issue of proportionality.
[Guest]: Proportionality and, you know, whether the issue merits that kind of a response. So,
[Amit Varma]: that search for that space, therefore, continues, right.
[Amit Varma]: And the problem, another problem with the cold start also would be that it's hard for
[Amit Varma]: us to predict what action they will consider sufficiently escalatory to go nuclear. So,
[Amit Varma]: we might think, for example, that we will go as far as point X and then we will come
[Amit Varma]: back, but they don't know that. So, you know, for example, you know, if we go into POK,
[Amit Varma]: that's one thing, and it might not even be sufficient provocation. But if we go anywhere
[Amit Varma]: in Punjab or Sindh, you know, Lahore is 25 kilometers from the border. We go 10 kilometers
[Amit Varma]: in, it's an existential threat for them. They could just go nuclear. So, since we don't
[Amit Varma]: know that, then as a matter of precaution, we don't go anywhere.
[Guest]: Well, I mean, so that's the problem, right? Which is that nobody really knows where those
[Guest]: red lines are. The Pakistani army and, you know, the head of the strategic plans division
[Guest]: back in the day had enunciated some red lines and so on. But there is every incentive for
[Guest]: Pakistan to keep those as hazy as possible, because you want to introduce uncertainty
[Guest]: in the minds of the Indian decision maker, right? You know, Thomas Schelling used to
[Guest]: say that, you know, there is a threat that leaves something to chance. That is exactly
[Guest]: the kind of posture that the Pakistanis will want to adopt, which is to say that, listen,
[Guest]: you don't know. And actually, frankly, even we don't know, because we will only know it
[Guest]: when we are in that crisis. And at that point of time, if you are going to use this particular
[Guest]: sort of option, then, you know, we genuinely don't know how we're going to do it. And again,
[Guest]: you know, Tom Schelling, who wrote some of the most classic pieces of work on thinking
[Guest]: through some of these dynamics of nuclear strategy, has this fantastic sort of, you
[Guest]: know, an image or a metaphor, example of how this works.
[Guest]: He says, think of two men in a boat, right? Both of whom are trying to say that one wants
[Guest]: the boat to go in the direction of one bank, and the other one wants to push it in the
[Guest]: other, right? So what's the best way of sort of convincing the other person is to start
[Guest]: rocking the boat. Because when you rock the boat, what you're threatening is not that,
[Guest]: you know, the other person will incur costs, but you're saying that both of them are going
[Guest]: to incur costs, and we just don't know what point the boat is going to tip over, right?
[Guest]: So those are threats that leave something to chance. And for Pakistan, it makes absolute
[Guest]: rational sense to adopt that kind of a posture, rather than allowing India to say that, listen,
[Guest]: we can be very sure of what is it that is going to trigger a nuclear use with Pakistan.
[Guest]: Now, Indian decision makers may well believe that, no, Pakistanis are bluffing that actually
[Guest]: their nuclear threshold is much higher, it is much further interior and so on. But can
[Guest]: you be sure?
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, is it like, you know, what game theorists would call the game of chicken
[Amit Varma]: where the more irrational party has a distinct advantage? And in this case, Pakistan can
[Amit Varma]: portray themselves as irrational, and you don't know what they're up to. But Indians,
[Amit Varma]: unfortunately, stick to a very sort of rational playbook. And that ship has probably sailed,
[Amit Varma]: we can't really portray ourselves as too irrational right now. But in that game of chicken, we
[Amit Varma]: are, we are losing, we are behind.
[Guest]: Well, I mean, I think the sort of, you know, the example of chicken might exaggerate the
[Guest]: elements of irrationality, which say a country like Pakistan has to demonstrate in this case,
[Guest]: Pakistan is a conventionally weaker, geographically smaller. And for them, it's, it's perfectly
[Guest]: rational to say that, listen, as the much smaller and weaker of the two sides, if we
[Guest]: believe we are under threat, then we may use whatever is at hand. We don't know. We just
[Guest]: cannot be sure. It's not about you cannot be sure, even we cannot be sure where those
[Amit Varma]: red lines are. That's the only way to play this game.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but in the game of chicken, it's always rational to portray yourself as a more irrational
[Guest]: like Kim does in North Korea, for example.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly. So, in this context, I mean, I think the Pakistanis have, you know, you
[Guest]: know, precisely all the incentives to act in ways that suggest that these things will
[Guest]: go out of control. And again, you know, this is not a hypothetical. If you, we'll come
[Guest]: to the latest sort of crisis. But if you recall, when Imran Khan, the Prime Minister of Pakistan,
[Guest]: gave a televised press speech, and this was even before the Indian airstrike happened,
[Guest]: he said, that, listen, you know, if India uses force, it's not like we will think of
[Guest]: using force, we will actually have to retaliate. And thereafter, you know, nobody knows all
[Guest]: bets are off. And that is exactly the rational approach to take for Pakistan by telling India
[Guest]: that listen, it's not just that you can guess or not guess where our red lines are, even
[Amit Varma]: we don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Right. We'll take a quick commercial break and come back on the other side of the break.
[Unknown]: Hello, everybody. Welcome to another awesome week on the IVM podcast network. If you are
[Unknown]: following us on social media, please make sure that you are. We are IVM podcast on Twitter,
[Unknown]: Facebook and Instagram. If you are following us on social media, I'm sure you know that
[Unknown]: it's our fourth anniversary this month. Yeah, IVM is four years old. We've done 3500 plus
[Unknown]: episodes of content and it's been an amazing ride with a lot of fun guests, a lot of fun
[Unknown]: content and a lot of great hosts. We'd like to thank all of our hosts because without
[Unknown]: them we wouldn't really be doing all that much. Also, I mentioned over the last couple
[Unknown]: of weeks that we're running a survey right now, a listener survey. It's on IVM podcast
[Unknown]: dot com slash survey. If you have not filled that out, please do fill it up. It'll help
[Unknown]: us figure out what is working for you, what's not working, and will give us some information
[Unknown]: that we can use to get some advertising on the show. On Cyrus Says, Cyrus is joined by
[Unknown]: comedian Nivedita Prakasam. They talk about Nivedita's experience on a TV reality show
[Unknown]: and how dating and growing up is different in small town India. We're launching a new
[Unknown]: show called States of Anarchy about global affairs hosted by foreign policy enthusiast
[Unknown]: Hamsini Hariharan. On IVM Lies, Janam, Abbas, Karthik, and Alika celebrate IVM's 4th anniversary
[Unknown]: by recommending some standout episodes and recollecting their favorite moments and experiences.
[Unknown]: On Dating is Garbage, the hosts are joined by guest Sharanya Subramaniam to discuss dating
[Unknown]: red flags. On Paisa Vaisa, Anupam is joined by Jai Toshnival, CEO of Toshnival Equities,
[Unknown]: who explains how you can create wealth with equities. On the Habit Coach podcast, Ashton
[Unknown]: talks about the importance of checking food labels before buying to avoid hidden sugar,
[Unknown]: salt, and fat content. On the Svanch podcast, Ambhi Parmeswaran sheds light on the significance
[Unknown]: of reducing body copy of print ads and making the headlines stand out. And with that, let's
[Amit Varma]: continue with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Srinath Raghavan about the India
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan conflicts and the many things that the different options that India can reasonably
[Amit Varma]: contemplate or the different options that India explored after the dynamic of 98 with
[Amit Varma]: deterrence in where they're trying to explore what kind of space of retaliation is possible
[Amit Varma]: between the sub conventional and the nuclear. What can they do that doesn't provoke a nuclear
[Amit Varma]: response from Pakistan, and at the same time satisfies the need for revenge or the need
[Amit Varma]: to appear strong or the bloodlust of a domestic audience. So one of the options which you
[Amit Varma]: just pointed out is a cold start doctrine, which is the army goes in and it occupies
[Amit Varma]: territory but is impractical because we simply don't know at what you know what will be enough
[Amit Varma]: of a trigger for them to actually go nuclear. The other option which we've actually seen
[Amit Varma]: in recent times are these limited air strikes, where you sort of, you know, do what is what
[Amit Varma]: is called a surgical strike and you don't actually so far until recently go into Pakistani
[Amit Varma]: territory you're just striking at alleged terrorist scams across the line of control
[Amit Varma]: in Pakistan occupied Kashmir and you know, how effective are they and are they something
[Amit Varma]: that is now effective more in an optical sense than a military sense?
[Guest]: So the first thing we need to sort of parse out is what are the various kinds of objectives
[Guest]: that we have when we are trying to say use air power as we did in a context like this.
[Guest]: So in the first instance, I would say that, you know, revenge is not a strategic objective.
[Guest]: A strategic objective is the use of some means in order to achieve certain kinds of ends.
[Amit Varma]: But it's sort of a political objective for the domestic audience.
[Guest]: So every strategic action has an outward dimension, as well as an inward dimension, right?
[Guest]: So the inward dimension of the use of, say, air strikes or surgical strikes as in 2016
[Guest]: could be very much to signal to domestic audiences that here is a government which takes these
[Guest]: things strongly, you know, it gives confidence to the people that these things will not.
[Guest]: And of course, you can exploit it for political objectives, you know, various domestic political
[Guest]: sort of purposes and so on. Now, but I don't think that's per se illegitimate.
[Guest]: In fact, all kinds of strategic action will have this inward dynamic.
[Guest]: The only question is whether you allow all strategic choices to be dictated by those
[Guest]: or not.
[Guest]: Even for terrorist organizations, it is there, right?
[Guest]: I mean, they have to demonstrate to their supporters, their funders, their cadre that
[Guest]: they are in action.
[Guest]: So they have to carry out certain kinds of things.
[Guest]: So that's the first thing, right?
[Guest]: So you have a sort of inward dimension, which is about signaling to domestic audiences about
[Guest]: what you want to do.
[Guest]: But the more important and central sort of strategic concern has to be to say, what do
[Guest]: you want to use force for?
[Guest]: So as I see it, I mean, there are at least two different kind of objectives there which
[Guest]: are related, but not exactly the same.
[Guest]: So one is to say that we want to signal to the terrorist organizations themselves that
[Guest]: they will directly incur costs if they carry out attacks on India, and that those attacks
[Guest]: in sense also degrade their capacity to carry out future attacks, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, strikes are there targeted at the terrorist organization.
[Guest]: The other thing is to say that, you know, we actually want to deter Pakistan from continuing
[Guest]: to support or allowing these groups to operate out of its territory.
[Guest]: The two things are not necessarily the same.
[Guest]: They are somewhat related, but they are distinct objectives for us to pursue as well.
[Guest]: Now, if we are thinking about saying, do we want to degrade the capacity of terrorist
[Guest]: organizations to carry out some attacks?
[Guest]: Yes, airstrikes, if effectively carried out, can enable that objective.
[Guest]: Yes, they will take hits.
[Guest]: It will take them a while to repair and get back into the game and so on.
[Guest]: If we are thinking about saying, will airstrikes actually allow or change Pakistan's behavior,
[Guest]: its stance towards the way that it thinks about using these groups, frankly, then the
[Guest]: quantum of force which is being used there is unlikely to be sufficient to be able to
[Guest]: change Pakistan's decision calculus in any significant way.
[Guest]: Because let us remember at the end of the day, these jihadi tanzims and various terrorist
[Guest]: organizations are effectively embedded with elements of the Pakistani state.
[Guest]: That is the way in which historically that state has developed.
[Guest]: It is very difficult to change the nature of that state.
[Guest]: You know, if you think of historical examples, you know, if you want to sort of change the
[Guest]: nature of certain kinds of states, you know, Nazi Germany, Imperial Japan, it took massive
[Guest]: defeats in world wars, occupation, rewriting of constitutions, prolonged periods of political
[Guest]: re-education, but even then only sort of, you know, success to varying degrees.
[Guest]: What are the odds that an airstrike or even a series of airstrikes by India is going to
[Guest]: change the nature of the Pakistani state?
[Guest]: I think the odds are frankly limited.
[Guest]: So we have to be clear about what is it that we want.
[Guest]: If we want to say deter the Pakistanis from, you know, by saying that, listen, they should
[Guest]: tell their tanzims that listen, there is a certain quantum beyond which you don't want
[Guest]: to provoke India.
[Guest]: That's fine.
[Guest]: You've achieved some degree of objective by telling them that, listen, don't site your
[Guest]: camps here and there, actually relocate them, push them further back outside of the range
[Guest]: of the Indian military's ability to hit you.
[Guest]: Fine.
[Guest]: Some objective has been achieved.
[Guest]: But if the assumption is that the use of these kinds of strikes is going to change Pakistan's
[Guest]: fundamental calculus about how it thinks of using it, then it is unlikely to achieve that
[Guest]: objective, right?
[Guest]: There is space between the conventional and the nuclear realm where India can use force.
[Guest]: But the question is whether that use of force is going to advance the objectives that you
[Guest]: want.
[Amit Varma]: So on one hand, you don't actually change the fundamental calculus that the Pakistani
[Amit Varma]: state is going to continue supporting these groups.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, while you may make it operationally harder for them to strike
[Amit Varma]: because you've destroyed a camp and they'll take time to reboot and maybe they need to
[Amit Varma]: have their future camps further out, it could also work the other way because any jihadi
[Amit Varma]: deaths that you actually cause could motivate new jihadis and future jihadis into coming
[Amit Varma]: into battle.
[Amit Varma]: Plus, any civilian casualties that you cause will essentially be creating new terrorists
[Guest]: out of nothing.
[Guest]: Well, one is simply about that kind of dynamic of revenge and so on, right?
[Guest]: Another very plausible dynamic is to say that it may actually give the sort of jihadi organizations
[Guest]: incentives to carry out even larger attacks on India, right?
[Guest]: Because if you are a terrorist organization, one of the major objectives that you really
[Guest]: want is to sort of get India into some kind of a serious confrontation with Pakistan.
[Guest]: And if their reading is that, listen, every time there's a major attack, India is going
[Guest]: to respond with ever stronger strikes, then it makes sense to sort of keep provoking India
[Amit Varma]: further and further.
[Amit Varma]: But why is that?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, their support for all these jihadi groups, doesn't it come out of Zia
[Amit Varma]: ul Haq's stated doctrine of leading India by a thousand carts and therefore they want
[Amit Varma]: to keep leading India with small carts and not actually have it escalate too far.
[Guest]: No, I'm saying that is the incentive for the jihadi organizations themselves.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, so that's why I'm saying that, you know, it's not as if the jihadi organizations
[Guest]: and the Pakistani state have exactly the same set of incentives, they don't.
[Guest]: They neither have exactly the same set of incentives, nor do they have exactly the same
[Guest]: degrees of means and capabilities, right?
[Guest]: They are different sets, which is why I'm saying that in dealing with this problem, in thinking
[Guest]: about whether air power or any other say missile strikes or some kind of the future can actually
[Guest]: help you deal with the problem of terrorism, we have to understand that, yes, that will
[Guest]: constitute deterrence by punishment of a certain variety.
[Guest]: But deterrence by punishment, even of the variety that you are able to impose is unlikely
[Guest]: to be able to solve the problem for you.
[Guest]: For the simple reason that that problem is kind of endemic to the Pakistani state.
[Guest]: And if you really want to change the behavior of the state, then you're talking about something
[Guest]: orders of magnitude, higher levels of use of force, which the nuclear conflict context
[Guest]: really precludes you from doing.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So therefore, I think there are limits to what you can achieve by adopting a strategy
[Guest]: of deterrence by punishment.
[Guest]: Deterrence by punishment works better for your domestic audiences, because you are seen
[Guest]: as hitting back.
[Guest]: If you look at the response to these strikes in India, you know, why is there such a great
[Guest]: sort of, you know, whole degree of chest thumping going on saying we have now shown it to them?
[Guest]: Because you just feel like you are helpless in some ways.
[Guest]: It is not that the Indian state was doing nothing about these things.
[Guest]: Yeah, we do have our own sort of sets of intelligence, covert capabilities, various other kinds of
[Guest]: ways of imposing costs on these groups.
[Guest]: But those are not things that can be put out in the public domain day in and day out.
[Guest]: Whereas a strike like this sends out a signal that listen, we are really sort of going to
[Guest]: take the game to them.
[Guest]: But the problem is that it also sets expectations that somehow doing more of this is the solution
[Guest]: to the problem, which I don't think is true.
[Guest]: Deterrence by punishment will only have limited effects within the context of the India Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: story.
[Amit Varma]: And also that there's a law of diminishing returns in the sense that the more surgical
[Amit Varma]: strikes we do, the more effective each one will be even in mobilizing domestic opinion.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, the first one, the Uri one might satisfy that domestic bloodlust to some extent,
[Amit Varma]: this one to a lesser extent and so on till it kind of becomes obvious that this is just
[Amit Varma]: optics and Pakistan isn't stopping.
[Guest]: Well, the other thing, of course, and you know, which is what the current sort of crisis
[Guest]: brought about is that the Pakistanis will respond in kind to a significant degree.
[Guest]: They do have the capabilities to do that.
[Guest]: See if you think about the difference between the Pakistani response after Uri and the Pakistani
[Guest]: response here, the salient difference, it seems to me, is that in that context, Pakistan
[Guest]: had some kind of what you might think as a face saving solution.
[Guest]: India carried out these strikes quietly, you came and then made an announcement and the
[Guest]: Pakistanis could just turn around and say, hey, nothing happened.
[Guest]: But in this case, when the Pulwama attacks happened, your political leadership made clear
[Guest]: speeches saying that Pakistan will have to pay the price for this.
[Guest]: So the threat was sent out explicitly.
[Guest]: And after that, when you actually carried through on the threat, it becomes almost impossible
[Guest]: for Pakistan not to be able to respond in the same way.
[Guest]: The second thing is that the use of air power in this context, in some ways, moves beyond
[Guest]: the tacitly agreed threshold between the two sides.
[Guest]: Once again, to go back to my sort of favorite thinker, Tom Schelling, in this context, Schelling
[Guest]: has this idea of what he thinks of as thresholds, right.
[Guest]: He says thresholds, when you're thinking about limited wars in a nuclear context, both sides
[Guest]: will use force to extents and in ways that are limited to certain clearly identifiable
[Guest]: thresholds.
[Guest]: Those thresholds could be geographic context, they could be lines on the map, they could
[Guest]: be use of certain kinds of weapon systems, right.
[Guest]: Now what Schelling says is that even if both sides are not talking to each other and agreeing
[Guest]: saying that we are only going to fight till the line of control or that we are only going
[Guest]: to sort of use ground power, we are not going to use air power, there is a tacit understanding
[Guest]: which comes.
[Guest]: That's a tacit bargain.
[Guest]: So a threshold is a result of a tacit bargain to restrict the use of force to certain domains.
[Guest]: Now, I think it's fair to say that at least in the period from the late 1990s till about,
[Guest]: you know, early this year, the threshold was very much seen as use of force on either side
[Guest]: of the line of control.
[Guest]: The Pakistanis could sort of carry out terrorist attacks, you would strike them across the
[Guest]: line of control.
[Guest]: Sometimes you would do it to greater or lesser extents.
[Guest]: In the Uri context, we saw a very concerted kind of operation which took place, which
[Guest]: was called surgical strikes at that point of time.
[Guest]: Now, but still that did not cross the previously laid down threshold.
[Guest]: Whereas with the use of air power, you opened up the threshold.
[Guest]: And for the Pakistanis to restore a tacit balance meant that they had to respond to
[Guest]: you by the use of air power.
[Guest]: You know, it's very interesting, the air chief in a recent press conference said that, you
[Guest]: know, people are asking us if Indian airstrikes were effective or not.
[Guest]: If they were not effective, why did the Pakistanis respond by the use of air power?
[Guest]: With all due respect, I think that's exactly the wrong way to think about the problem.
[Amit Varma]: That depends on how you define effective, right?
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: No, it's not even about effectiveness.
[Guest]: The sheer fact that you breached the threshold meant that for Pakistan to restore deterrence,
[Guest]: they had to demonstrate their ability to do the same thing to you in the same sort of
[Guest]: plane.
[Guest]: So now, the use of air power has become the new threshold at which India-Pakistan conflicts
[Guest]: are going to be limited.
[Guest]: Now, if Pakistan had not done that, then it would have given signal that India can continue
[Guest]: to keep breaking thresholds.
[Guest]: And it's a one sided story.
[Guest]: But as I said, every strategic action is about what the other side does as well.
[Guest]: You know, this inability to sort of understand some of these dynamics, I think, has been
[Guest]: at the heart of some of the mistakes that we've made, at least in terms of setting popular
[Guest]: expectations about various things, right?
[Guest]: Now, there is a very influential strand of argument which has been made by many air power
[Guest]: thinkers in this country, including former air force officers, who've been advocating
[Guest]: for a long time saying that the use of air power is not escalatory, right?
[Guest]: That if we choose very clearly defined targets, and we use air power, air power is actually
[Guest]: a relatively cost free, but highly precise way of delivering these effects.
[Guest]: Fair enough.
[Guest]: But escalation depends on what the other side decides to do.
[Guest]: It is not just about what you want to do.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, Clausewitz has this fantastic image with which the book begins.
[Guest]: He says war, think of war as two wrestlers, each of whom is trying to use force to pin
[Guest]: the other one down.
[Guest]: If one person decides to use a certain amount of force, there is automatically an incentive
[Guest]: for the other one to use more force, and vice versa.
[Guest]: And this reciprocal interaction is what we call escalation, right?
[Guest]: So this idea that listen, we can use air power, and it's not going to escalate is premised
[Guest]: on the notion that Pakistan cannot use air power.
[Guest]: And what they have shown to you is that yes, they can.
[Guest]: They are militarily weaker than us, but they do have the capabilities to do this.
[Guest]: So I think it's important to understand some of these dynamics.
[Guest]: So the Pakistanis had to respond in the air to show that they could match you.
[Guest]: But also to suggest that listen, if we continue in this vein, there will be further escalation.
[Guest]: So I don't think, Amit, therefore, that it is wise for us to assume that we can continue
[Guest]: to do these things ad infinitum going forward, because every incentive is aligned for Pakistan
[Guest]: to suggest that escalation will happen much more quickly, that we cannot take for granted
[Guest]: that this space is kind of open ended, and that we can continue to do unilateral strikes.
[Amit Varma]: So what could we do wrong and what could we do right the next time there is a strike?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, forget long term strategy for the moment.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say a month later, there's another strike and the elections are closer.
[Amit Varma]: What can we do wrong?
[Amit Varma]: What can we do right?
[Guest]: Well, for one thing, I would say that if God forbid, there are any further strikes within
[Guest]: a very short period of time, I honestly do not see how politically it will be possible
[Guest]: for any government not to at a minimum, do more air strikes, raise the threshold even
[Guest]: further, or at least do what you've done, maybe introduce, break other kinds of thresholds,
[Guest]: maybe do missile strikes, maybe carry out some kind of action in the sort of naval domain,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: And they are forced to respond.
[Unknown]: They will be forced to respond.
[Guest]: So I actually think that and that is again, because of this kind of, you know, fact that
[Guest]: all strategic actors have to think about their domestic constituencies as well.
[Guest]: I don't see that as somehow a vitiating factor.
[Guest]: That is the nature of the structure of the game.
[Guest]: Those audiences have to be responded to.
[Guest]: And I think now that they, you know, threshold of air power has been breached.
[Guest]: In fact, in some ways, the funny thing is that the onus is going to be on every future
[Guest]: government if it does not resort to air strikes to somehow make the case saying why you did
[Guest]: not do it.
[Guest]: Yeah, because your political opponents and others will constantly come back to you and
[Guest]: say, Hey, aren't you weaker than those guys who actually used it?
[Amit Varma]: And it's not just therefore it would seem to me that it's not just for each side to
[Amit Varma]: consider its own domestic imperatives, but also for say Pakistan to consider our imperatives.
[Amit Varma]: So now it would be their interest not to have escalation as well because they want to continue
[Amit Varma]: bleeding us by a thousand cuts.
[Amit Varma]: And they would know that if they do carry out another terrorist attack before the elections
[Amit Varma]: is probably going to escalate and you don't know where it will stop.
[Amit Varma]: So it is at this moment in time in their interest as well to put this to a stop for a while.
[Guest]: Well, the Pakistanis have shown that degree of rationality quite a few times in the past
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, if you think about what happened in the 2008 crisis, right after the Mumbai attacks,
[Guest]: again, you know, we know, we know from, you know, reporting this time around that some
[Guest]: of the options that were exercised now were already sort of being developed at that point
[Guest]: of time.
[Guest]: And we were in place before the political leadership.
[Guest]: But at that point of time, the political leadership had other considerations, you know, you were
[Guest]: coming off the back of a major global financial crisis.
[Guest]: India wanted to be seen as a responsible power.
[Guest]: You wanted to sort of, you know, focus on various other kinds of things.
[Guest]: So you bought a lot of diplomatic pressure to bear on Pakistan.
[Guest]: But then that did make sure that you do not have attacks of a significant scale on urban
[Guest]: India for at least a while.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So it is not the case that the Pakistanis are totally irrational or that the Tanzims
[Guest]: are entirely sort of independent actors.
[Guest]: So yes, your actions can, you know, impose a degree of caution.
[Guest]: And it is very much my hope that, you know, at least this set of actions that we've carried
[Guest]: out buys us some amount of time.
[Amit Varma]: So before we move on to the third option, after the Cold Start Doctrine and after surgical
[Amit Varma]: airstrikes, before we move on to the third option, just thinking aloud, would it then
[Amit Varma]: be the case that the two previous crises we've had in the last 20 years, which is basically
[Amit Varma]: like after Kargil, basically, in the 2001 attacks and Operation Parakram that went on,
[Amit Varma]: what happened was there was this vast military mobilization by India, and we couldn't really
[Amit Varma]: do anything after that.
[Amit Varma]: The cost was immense.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, 800 people died, I think, just during the mobilization, somewhere 800 soldiers.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's primarily because you lost people to various accidents, you know, they were
[Guest]: demining operations and so on.
[Guest]: Not in active combat.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and yeah, obviously, because there was no active combat, but the costs were huge
[Amit Varma]: for us.
[Amit Varma]: And Pakistan managed to get us to back down.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, they were the winners there.
[Amit Varma]: And in 2008, because of the diplomatic pressure that we brought to bear, and, you know, it
[Amit Varma]: could be said and India standing in the world went up because of the restraint we showed
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: It could be said that India came out slightly on top over there.
[Amit Varma]: Would that be a fair assessment?
[Guest]: Well, again, I think, you know, the way we read the 2001 crisis, obviously, you know,
[Guest]: I think our interpretation changes as time passes, right.
[Guest]: So if you look at the 2001 crisis, one way of judging India's attempt at coercing Pakistan
[Guest]: is to say that it was a failure.
[Guest]: It failed, because India actually laid down some clear demands.
[Guest]: It gave a list of some 20 terrorists who had to be handed over by Pakistan to India, and
[Guest]: the Pakistanis never did that.
[Guest]: So you can say that, listen, you mobilized the threat of force, but that did not work.
[Guest]: And ultimately, you know, you didn't get so it is a failure.
[Guest]: But I think that would be a mistaken way of thinking about what happened in 2001.
[Guest]: What happened in 2001, in a sense, was, you know, to use Vipin Narang's sort of phrase,
[Guest]: India's action was also catalytic in some ways, because India's action catalyzed a lot
[Guest]: of diplomatic pressure on Pakistan.
[Guest]: And Parvez Musharraf was forced not just to ban organizations like the Lashkar and the
[Guest]: Jaish, but to give sort of assurances in public that Pakistani territory would not be used
[Guest]: for this thing.
[Guest]: The end of the crisis in some ways paved way for a resumption of meetings between Musharraf
[Guest]: and Prime Minister Bajpai.
[Guest]: And that is what then led in 2004 to the unilateral declaration of a ceasefire by Pakistan.
[Guest]: And let's not forget that in the period between 2004 to 2009, you did have a significant level
[Guest]: of drop of insurgency infiltration in Jammu and Kashmir.
[Guest]: Because of a combination of factors, Pakistan did not want to be in the doghouse post 9-11.
[Guest]: You know, the threat of war had also sort of catalyzed action.
[Guest]: They understood that it was better to talk to India.
[Guest]: There was a serious dialogue going on in the back channels between Manmohan Singh and Musharraf.
[Guest]: All of that created a context for the Pakistanis actually sort of gave it.
[Guest]: Would we have had this context without the 2001 crisis happening?
[Guest]: I think that counterfactual somehow seems not very persuasive to me.
[Guest]: So I think there were second order effects, which were quite important.
[Guest]: You know, part of the problem for people who study, you know, strategic interactions in
[Guest]: a social sciences way is that you want to code outcomes as either one or zero.
[Guest]: Either you got what you wanted or you did not.
[Guest]: Whereas I think political actors are always willing to live with considerably higher levels
[Guest]: of ambiguity of outcomes.
[Guest]: And to say that, listen, if we are in a better situation than what we were earlier, we would
[Guest]: still think of that as having accomplished something.
[Guest]: Whether the costs were proportionate or not is something we can discuss.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's something that people should debate.
[Guest]: But I think to say that, you know, the 2001 crisis got us nowhere, I think is incorrect.
[Guest]: It actually sort of paved the way for a period when Pakistan exercised considerable degree
[Guest]: of restraint.
[Guest]: It was not the only reason that happened.
[Guest]: There was an international context.
[Guest]: There was a bilateral context which shifted, which enabled that to happen.
[Guest]: But that was important.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, in the 2008 crisis.
[Amit Varma]: So speaking of ambiguity of outcomes, that kind of takes us to a third option after cold
[Amit Varma]: start and surgical air strikes us.
[Amit Varma]: Also, the school of thought that says that we should counter them if we don't already
[Amit Varma]: to a very small extent, and perhaps we did more than we do now, but we should counter
[Amit Varma]: them in the subconventional domain where people argued that, okay, if they are fomenting insurgencies
[Amit Varma]: in Kashmir, we should foment insurgencies in Balochistan and Gilgit-Baltistan and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: What do you feel about that line of thought?
[Guest]: Well, in the first instance, I think covert operations are very much the part of every
[Guest]: country's toolkit for countering terrorism.
[Guest]: And I would be very surprised if India is not, you know, using or has not used.
[Guest]: We know for a fact that, you know, some things have happened.
[Guest]: But should we think of covert actions simply as the sort of retaliatory support for various
[Guest]: kinds of terrorist actions or insurgencies in Pakistan?
[Guest]: I think that would be a very impoverished way of thinking about the range of things
[Guest]: that constitutes what covert action can do, right?
[Guest]: Covert action can mean non-military, but intelligence-led ways of degrading the capacities of these
[Guest]: things, of targeting their leadership.
[Guest]: You know, people tend to forget after the 2008 crisis, some of the key actors on the
[Guest]: Pakistani side on the Lashkar who were sort of, you know, technical handlers, people who
[Guest]: enabled that operation to be, were captured from all kinds of places.
[Guest]: They were picked up from Spain, they were picked up from Sri Lanka by the government
[Guest]: of India.
[Guest]: Oh, really?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I'm not revealing any state secrets out here, not that I'm privy to any.
[Guest]: And these are very much examples of what you would think of as, you know, various kinds
[Guest]: of covert and overt operations.
[Guest]: So I think therefore to, you know, think in somewhat crude ways that, oh, the only way
[Guest]: to sort of pay them back in the covert coin is by doing a Balochistan for a Kashmir, is
[Guest]: I think, it just doesn't make any sense.
[Guest]: And there are reputational costs for a country like India of going down the route, which
[Guest]: I'd imagine Indian decision makers will take on board because, you know, you have to have
[Guest]: plausible deniability.
[Guest]: Already in Pakistan, there is this clamour saying every terrorist like that is happening
[Guest]: in Pakistan and somehow being covertly funded and supported by India and so on.
[Guest]: So I think covert operation actually has a very important role to play in countering
[Guest]: terrorism.
[Guest]: And India is, has sort of used those capabilities and they do present one more way of imposing
[Guest]: costs on Pakistan.
[Guest]: So if you're thinking about deterrence by punishment, it is not just sort of, you know,
[Guest]: use of land forces across the line of control or the, you know, cold start kind of doctrines,
[Guest]: nor is it just the use of sort of, you know, air strikes or missile strikes and so on.
[Guest]: But you also have to think about these kinds of ways of bringing to bear costs directly
[Guest]: on the, you know, jihadi tanzims and others.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, on the pros side of the issue, if you're looking at pros and cons, I guess a
[Amit Varma]: couple of the pros would be that one, it acts as some kind of deterrence by punishment.
[Amit Varma]: Two, it can be a bargaining chip on the table that look, if you stop doing covert operations
[Amit Varma]: here, we'll go easy there, otherwise we'll keep retaliating whenever you do something
[Amit Varma]: here.
[Amit Varma]: But on the con side of it, we lose the higher moral ground when it comes to the diplomatic
[Amit Varma]: stage where we can no longer portray ourselves credibly as victims of terrorism.
[Amit Varma]: If we do that and be it becomes very difficult to sort of dial back from there for either
[Amit Varma]: side to actually unilaterally, you know, bring their level of support down when the other
[Amit Varma]: side is still doing it.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that kind of strikes me is that even if covert action and are doing
[Amit Varma]: subconventional things was to pay off in the long run, maybe not to the extent of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, actually fomenting terrorism in Balochistan or whatever, but just sort of strengthening
[Amit Varma]: internal intelligence and doing disruptive things.
[Amit Varma]: Even if it was to pay off in the long run, there's no advantage for it politically.
[Amit Varma]: A politician would rather be seen doing something.
[Amit Varma]: And in the case of covert actions is covert, he doesn't get any political benefit from
[Amit Varma]: it, even if it's effective and it takes years to play out and you don't know counterfactuals.
[Amit Varma]: So that reduces the incentive slightly for politicians to go for that, right?
[Guest]: Well, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: I think the entire range of sort of considerations that you laid out will come into play in the
[Guest]: way that you think about sort of covert action and so on.
[Guest]: But ultimately, you know, covert actions like any other overt form of use of military force
[Guest]: for punishment, you know, will have to be judged by the kind of results that it gives
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: As I said, deterrence by punishment on its own, even including all of these menu of options
[Guest]: that you have, is unlikely to be able to suffice either to bring down the scale of attacks
[Guest]: on you, let alone changing the political behavior of the Pakistani state.
[Amit Varma]: But would you view it as a net positive or something we should not do?
[Guest]: Well, I think it is a net positive in that, as I said, there are a range of things that
[Guest]: you can do with covert action, which are not necessarily the same as sort of supporting
[Guest]: terrorists who are striking Pakistan.
[Guest]: Because today, if you look at it, I mean, what is the major advantage that India has?
[Guest]: It is that whether we like it or not, in the year 2019, it is very difficult for any state
[Guest]: to say that, listen, we are supporting terrorism because these are not terrorists, they are
[Guest]: freedom fighters.
[Guest]: That entire argument, you know, which used to be the sort of standard line brought it
[Guest]: out in favor of various kinds of national liberation movements, which resorted to violence,
[Guest]: has been discredited.
[Guest]: In a sense, the argument that we are supporting terrorists because they are fighting for a
[Guest]: good cause does not have any traction internationally anymore.
[Guest]: And I think that is a huge advantage for India to put Pakistan in the dock, rather than assume
[Guest]: that we should sort of therefore be caught in the same sort of or whatever, even to the
[Guest]: extent that, you know, because at the end of the day, these are not things which can
[Guest]: be sort of, you know, shoved under the carpet forever, and even minor slip ups can sort
[Guest]: of cost us.
[Guest]: And again, our own history suggests that there are potential downside costs to doing those
[Guest]: kinds of things.
[Guest]: Think of the support that we gave to the LTT in the early stages of the sort of Sri Lankan
[Guest]: problem, right, in the early 1980s, the LTT was effectively being supported, being trained
[Guest]: in the R&DW camps is all very well known now.
[Guest]: And ultimately, the LTT proved to be an instrument which was not amenable to your control.
[Guest]: You had to fight them and incur huge amounts of costs and then finally pull out.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a common theme with a lot of covert operations in a sense, even a lot of what
[Unknown]: the US is doing.
[Guest]: So unless and until you are willing to sort of embed them into your state and security
[Guest]: structures and architectures in a way that Pakistan has done, it is possibly not that.
[Guest]: But even from Pakistan's point of view, right?
[Guest]: Think about it.
[Guest]: Imagine when Imran Khan comes on television and says that 70,000 Pakistanis have died
[Guest]: due to terrorism.
[Guest]: You know, I don't, I can't vote for that figure.
[Guest]: But it is definitely the case that there have been many terrorist attacks in Pakistan.
[Guest]: But that is the kind of blowback that you would expect if you are harboring such significant
[Guest]: levels of non-state actors capable of inflicting violence in your own state.
[Guest]: I mean, in a sense, that is inescapable condition of developing those kinds of institutions
[Guest]: in the first place.
[Guest]: So even for Pakistan, if they were to look at it rationally, the pursuit of terrorism
[Guest]: really has not given anything.
[Guest]: But the reality is that the Pakistani state has defined its own self-image as one which
[Guest]: is directly counterposed to that of India.
[Guest]: And it is that rivalry and the desire for parity, you know, Farzana Sheikh, the great
[Guest]: Pakistani historian, you know, puts this very, very neatly, which is say that, you know,
[Guest]: from the very beginning, from the demand for Pakistan made in the Lahore sort of Congress
[Guest]: of the Muslim League, Lahore sort of, you know, session of the Muslim League in 1940.
[Guest]: What has been the argument?
[Guest]: Argument has always been that we have to be equal to India, right?
[Guest]: That pursuit of parity with India at all costs has come at an enormous sort of this thing.
[Guest]: But it is kind of hardwired into their system.
[Guest]: And frankly, it is for the Pakistani people now to sort of force their state to change,
[Guest]: to dial back, or for some great external, you know, sort of cataclysm to happen.
[Guest]: But in the context of nuclear weapons, frankly, thinking that, you know, we can use force
[Guest]: in order to bring about that degree of change in the Pakistani state architecture is, I
[Guest]: think, frankly, it's not on the cards.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, the fourth option, you know, is on the table and is constantly being used to differing
[Amit Varma]: degrees is diplomacy.
[Amit Varma]: And tell me a little bit about how the great nations have traditionally viewed this conflict,
[Amit Varma]: and especially post the Cold War, you know, what is the US's stake on it?
[Amit Varma]: What is China's stake on it?
[Amit Varma]: They have their own imperatives.
[Amit Varma]: They both need Pakistan for different reasons and support Pakistan in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: How does that sort of play out and how well has India maneuvered the diplomatic minefield
[Amit Varma]: so to say?
[Guest]: Well, it's worth pointing out in the first place, that historically, the emergence of
[Guest]: these kinds of armed non-state actors in total cahoots with the Pakistani state was enabled
[Guest]: precisely by a international context of the latest stages of the Cold War, right?
[Guest]: In the aftermath of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, it is the United States of America,
[Guest]: along with Saudi Arabia, which bankrolled the sort of, you know, arming of these various
[Guest]: kinds of Mujahideen groups, many of whom were at that point of time feted as sort of freedom
[Guest]: fighters, you know, you can even see photographs and videos of them sort of coming to the White
[Guest]: House lawns and so on during the Reagan administration time.
[Guest]: And let's also not forget that China at that point of time was also actively supporting
[Guest]: Pakistan in supporting these groups.
[Guest]: In fact, one of the very interesting and less known facts of international history of the
[Guest]: early 1980s is that that was a period when the Chinese were actually selling a lot of
[Guest]: weapons to the United States of America.
[Guest]: Oh.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: They were selling Soviet built weapons, which could then be transferred to the Mujahideen,
[Guest]: which could then be difficult for the Soviets to say that this is actually Red Army sort
[Guest]: of equipment, right, which the Chinese held in their stocks.
[Guest]: So you know, the arms trade was actually running the other way around in that period.
[Guest]: So this was a constellation of international forces which enabled the creation of this
[Guest]: infrastructure.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think, you know, there is a lot of sort of responsibility or blame
[Guest]: or whichever way you want to put it to go around.
[Guest]: And you know, it was that context which enabled Pakistan and the ISI, which was not such a
[Guest]: powerful organization up until that point of time.
[Guest]: But Zia and, you know, the Pakistan army drove a tough bargain.
[Guest]: In fact, at one point of time when the Carter administration announced that they would give
[Guest]: this much support, Zia refused it.
[Guest]: He said, this is peanuts.
[Guest]: You know, imagine a poor country like Pakistan actually telling that to the United States
[Guest]: because they knew that they could drive a harder bargain, which is exactly what they
[Guest]: did.
[Guest]: And that then continued, right.
[Guest]: And in the sort of 90s, initially, when this was a problem, which was seen as primarily
[Guest]: a manifestation of the India-Pakistan dispute over Kashmir, rather than it being seen one
[Guest]: of sort of terrorism and violence against sort of civilians and so on.
[Guest]: You still were able to try and turn a blind eye or bring in some kind of false equations
[Guest]: by saying, oh, India is also carrying out human rights violations and so on.
[Guest]: It is only from after 9-11 really, that the issue of terrorism has come to be seen in
[Guest]: the frame in which we today look at it.
[Guest]: But even then, as you're saying, both the Chinese, the Pakistanis, the Saudis and everyone
[Guest]: else have their own sort of interests in play, and there is very limited reason for India
[Guest]: to assume that those interests will automatically map on to what we believe or there should
[Guest]: be.
[Guest]: But at the same time, there is every incentive for India to use diplomacy to suggest that
[Guest]: if Pakistani support for terrorism is not reined in, it will potentially result in significantly
[Guest]: higher levels of risks of what is going to happen in this part of the world.
[Guest]: And I think that's a very important part to convey to the international community that
[Guest]: they just cannot absolve themselves of any responsibility.
[Guest]: That you know, if you believe that you want to keep Pakistan warm because you want a certain
[Guest]: outcome in Afghanistan, you believe you want to keep Pakistan warm because you're building
[Guest]: this extraordinary infrastructure across the sort of, you know, CPEC projects and so on,
[Guest]: you better also learn to tell the Pakistanis that there will be significant costs for their
[Guest]: continuation of this.
[Guest]: And in that sense, I think the airstrikes have actually given us an opportunity to catalyze
[Guest]: diplomacy in a much stronger way than even in the past, because in the past we were counting
[Guest]: on our restraint.
[Guest]: Now, we are showing that the bounds of those restraints have been broken.
[Guest]: But in and going forward, unless and until the international community actually takes
[Guest]: this seriously, these things can go out of hand.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, India is seen by the United States, by China as an emerging sort
[Guest]: of power of a significant kind in the Asian context.
[Guest]: And it is in nobody's interest to allow terrorism from Pakistan to provoke India into carrying
[Guest]: out attacks, which will then result in significantly higher levels of punishment for Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: So after 9-11, you know, people in Pakistan used to refer to Al-Qaeda as Al-Faida because
[Amit Varma]: of all the foreign aid that flooded in and obviously the US needed them for the conflict
[Amit Varma]: in Afghanistan and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And it could still be argued that the US still needs them.
[Amit Varma]: And Pakistan does hold that bargaining chip where beyond a point, they don't have to listen
[Amit Varma]: to the US no matter what.
[Amit Varma]: You know, is that still the case or have things changed substantially?
[Amit Varma]: Does the US wield more leverage or are they still dependent on Pakistan for the Afghanistan
[Guest]: situation?
[Guest]: Well, on the one hand, the US does not wield that kind of leverage, because the United
[Guest]: States has steadily sort of, especially over the last 3-4 years, taken a tougher line on
[Guest]: Pakistan's support for terrorism.
[Guest]: Because let us not forget that the terrorism that affects the United States directly is
[Guest]: the support that Pakistan gives to various kinds of Taliban groups or to, you know, other
[Guest]: kinds of organizations which are attacking American soldiers in Afghanistan, right?
[Guest]: Or making the stability of Afghanistan in which the United States has invested so much
[Guest]: of time and treasure as basically not being a viable threat.
[Guest]: But that's different from like Jamaat-ud-Dawah and Jaisalmer.
[Guest]: But that is a different kind of a story.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, you have the Haqqani and others who are, so the Pakistanis, the Americans
[Guest]: have been trying to put the Pakistanis on the mat.
[Guest]: And the Trump administration has taken a reasonably tough line on some of that.
[Guest]: But that has also meant that the relationship between the United States and Pakistan, especially
[Guest]: under the Trump administration, is kind of frayed, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's not where it was earlier.
[Guest]: But on the other hand, as Trump and, you know, the United States looks to find some way out
[Guest]: and there are, there is every indication that they are doing it, you know, they have the
[Guest]: Special Envoy who's kind of reaching out to the Taliban, various other people.
[Guest]: You're looking to sort of create the state for some kind of a dignified exit out of Afghanistan.
[Guest]: The Americans also will need Pakistani cooperation to get to some kind of an end state, right?
[Guest]: So there is a degree of dependence, but I think their leverage is kind of limited.
[Guest]: In the current crisis, the United States actually expressed significant levels of support for
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: The National Security Advisor Bolton even called his Indian counterpart, Mr. Doval,
[Guest]: and told him that the United States accepts India's right to self-defense in these kinds
[Guest]: of situations, which is an important sort of expression of support for India.
[Guest]: And on the other hand, they put a lot of pressure on Pakistan not to retaliate or then subsequently
[Guest]: to release the pilot and so on.
[Guest]: So in a sense, the United States has kind of done what it could in the current context,
[Guest]: but its leverage on Pakistan is going to be limited and its dependence is going to be
[Guest]: higher.
[Guest]: So that is one aspect.
[Guest]: As far as China is concerned, it's undoubtedly emerging as the external player who has the
[Guest]: going forward, likely the more important clout on Pakistan, the nature of Pakistan's own
[Guest]: economic dependence on China, the relationship between China and Pakistan on military security
[Guest]: affairs, even on terrorism, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the kind of sort of, you know, Pakistan, the Chinese sort of, you know, technical hold
[Guest]: on nominating Masood Azhar or putting him on that list, etc.
[Guest]: All of that has been kind of important, at least in a symbolic sense.
[Guest]: So the Chinese will sort of continue to support Pakistan.
[Guest]: But I think at the same time, the Chinese are very rational actors as well.
[Guest]: If China wants to emerge as an important Asian power, if it sees itself playing in the same
[Guest]: league as the United States of America, then it should learn how to restrain its allies.
[Guest]: If it is not able to do that, if it is not able to deliver on places like China or North
[Guest]: Korea or any other context, then I think its ability to sort of position itself as a responsible,
[Guest]: you know, G2 kind of a player, which in its self-imagination it is, is going to be hollow
[Amit Varma]: and it's going to sort of prove more difficult.
[Amit Varma]: And would it be fair to say that the growing friendship between China and Pakistan is actually
[Amit Varma]: something we should welcome, because it increases China's incentives, given their economic interests
[Amit Varma]: in Pakistan, to put pressure on Pakistan to clamp down on the terrorism?
[Guest]: I have a slightly different reading of the China-Pakistan relationship.
[Guest]: You know, the Sino-Pakistani relationship goes, started really flourishing after the
[Guest]: India-China war of 1962, right?
[Guest]: It's from about 1963-64, when they signed a boundary accord and other things that the
[Guest]: relationship really starts flourishing.
[Guest]: But there was an important moment of inflection around the mid-1990s, particularly you can
[Guest]: think of 1996, when then Chinese President Jiang Zemin actually went to Pakistan.
[Guest]: And there he made a statement saying that, you know, Kashmir is a bilateral dispute between
[Guest]: India and Pakistan and that they should solve it, which is, funnily enough, India's line,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: It's not the Pakistani line.
[Guest]: And thereafter, during Kargil and various other crises, the Chinese were more or less
[Guest]: somewhat even-handed in their treatment, not to say, obviously, the relationship with Pakistan
[Guest]: is much stronger, but they did not tilt heavily in the side of Pakistan.
[Guest]: But what we have seen, particularly after about 2008, and I think there the US-India
[Guest]: nuclear deal was an important trigger, the Chinese have started tilting a lot more towards
[Guest]: Pakistan politically.
[Guest]: Their military and security relationship with Pakistan has deepened considerably in ways
[Guest]: that was not true earlier.
[Guest]: And now their economic relationship with Pakistan because of the Belt and Road Initiative and
[Guest]: the CPEC corridor is kind of also strengthened, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, I think one of the major challenges for Indian diplomacy is going to be to convince
[Guest]: China to adopt a slightly more even-handed position vis-a-vis India when it comes to
[Guest]: India-Pakistan issues.
[Guest]: I think that's an area where we can work on.
[Guest]: I think this is a good moment.
[Guest]: We have demonstrated our willingness to sort of use power if necessary.
[Guest]: And this is also a time when we are apparently having an upswing in our relations with China.
[Guest]: The Prime Minister went to Wuhan last year, met President Xi Jinping.
[Guest]: You know, we are supposedly sort of recalibrating our relationship.
[Guest]: And I think we should definitely make one of the objectives of this recalibration a
[Guest]: certain degree of restoration of balance by China when it comes to India-Pakistan relations.
[Guest]: I think that is a much more useful way of thinking about it rather than obsessing about
[Guest]: things like saying, you know, should China have blocked Masood Azhar?
[Guest]: I mean, frankly, you can put anyone on any UN list that's not going to stop terrorism
[Guest]: against India.
[Guest]: You know, all the rhetoric that happened in India after Pulwama saying, oh, the Chinese
[Guest]: should bear blame for what is happening, etc.
[Guest]: It's just, it's rhetoric, frankly.
[Guest]: That is not the kind of stuff that is going to advance hard national interests.
[Guest]: Those can only be advanced if we take a very hard-headed view of what we want out of our
[Guest]: relationship with China and what it is the Chinese can give.
[Guest]: And I think this is the moment for us to exercise all those options.
[Amit Varma]: So before we move on to talking about deterrence by denial, let me kind of try to sum up what
[Amit Varma]: we've spoken about deterrence by punishment so far.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me if this is accurate, basically because of the deterrence dominance, so to say, of
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan in the sense that they deter us with the nuclear weapons, but you know, they continue
[Amit Varma]: doing at a subconventional level, whatever they do.
[Amit Varma]: Among the options we have, therefore, explored in the last 20 years include the Cold Star
[Amit Varma]: Doctrine, which for various reasons, which we discussed doesn't really work.
[Amit Varma]: The surgical airstrikes, which has a limited value in actually changing the Pakistani state's
[Amit Varma]: behavior or the basic calculus there, and even the political payback in India might
[Amit Varma]: diminish as they go on.
[Amit Varma]: The third option is, of course, subconventional, which is covert and therefore, you know, even
[Amit Varma]: if our leaders choose to ramp it up, they'll only see the benefits after a long time and
[Amit Varma]: we don't really know what's going on there.
[Amit Varma]: And the fourth is diplomacy where you've pointed out the various sort of forces at play.
[Amit Varma]: So it seems that as far as deterrence by punishment is concerned, yes, we've kind of raised the
[Amit Varma]: threshold with the recent airstrikes, but there is still a limit to what it can achieve.
[Amit Varma]: And your case would be that we can actually achieve much more through deterrence by denial.
[Guest]: Well, that's not just my case.
[Guest]: But I think a lot of the actual research on terrorism in various contexts actually shows
[Guest]: that terrorism is much better tackled by methods of denial rather than by methods of punishment.
[Guest]: In fact, methods of punishment pretty much haven't worked anywhere, right?
[Guest]: In most contexts, in a sense that say, even if you take the one case with which a lot
[Guest]: of people in India obsess, right, how the Israelis deal with it, you know, the Israelis
[Guest]: never claim that, you know, punishment strikes are ever going to stop the problem.
[Guest]: It hasn't stopped.
[Guest]: If you look at it objectively, the problem hasn't gone away for them.
[Guest]: What it has helped them to do is to sort of keep it under control.
[Guest]: But the Israeli context is totally incomparable to the Indian one, because Israel has conventional
[Guest]: capacities of a kind, it has a core nuclear capability, it has intelligence, you know,
[Guest]: apparatus of a kind, which far outstrips that of any of its other neighbors.
[Amit Varma]: Much easier to defend.
[Guest]: They have the wall.
[Guest]: Smaller territory.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So, you know, in a sense, it's that that is frankly, to my mind, a meaningless comparison
[Guest]: when it comes to India.
[Guest]: I mean, it only gives us some sense that, oh, they have a certain kind of machismo that
[Guest]: we don't, which I think is completely the wrong way of thinking about these problems.
[Guest]: But denial based strategies are the best ones.
[Guest]: I mean, if you think of most other contexts, in fact, you will automatically come to the
[Guest]: conclusion that denial based strategies are the best way, right?
[Guest]: Because see, punishment based strategies assume that you can target the particular entity
[Guest]: which is carrying out the undesirable action and impose punishment on it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But for most terrorist organizations, there is no return postcode in a way that there
[Guest]: is with conventional states.
[Guest]: In this case, because of the embeddedness of these groups with the Pakistani state,
[Guest]: you can think about that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, punishment based options, in most cases, will only degrade capacity to a certain extent.
[Guest]: You have to look at denial based options.
[Guest]: You have to look at ways of making it much, much more difficult and costly for any terrorist
[Guest]: organization to be able to carry out any significant attack of scale against you.
[Guest]: And the idea is that over a period of time, that diminishes incentives for them to think
[Guest]: about targeting India in quite that way.
[Guest]: I think that is the more important way of thinking about what exactly a strategy of
[Guest]: terrorism is.
[Guest]: And that is also a strategy which uses force.
[Guest]: That is not a strategy which is not using force.
[Guest]: But you use force in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: So elaborate on that a bit.
[Amit Varma]: What are the kind of different ways to deter by denying?
[Guest]: Well, deterrence by denial, again, you have an entire set of things starting from intelligence,
[Guest]: your ability to sort of, you know, understand that attacks are happening, which are the
[Guest]: groups that are likely to carry out, neutralize them, prevent them, thwart various kinds of
[Amit Varma]: plans.
[Amit Varma]: So the drama actually reflects a failure of the state in terms of intelligence and state
[Guest]: capacity and so on, isn't it?
[Guest]: So the one thing I will say is that, you know, obviously, simply because of the nature of
[Guest]: the game, successes of deterrence by denial are unlikely to go sort of recognized, right?
[Guest]: When someone does not do something, you don't know whether he's done it.
[Guest]: You don't celebrate what did not happen.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So it's very much that kind of a problem.
[Guest]: And conversely, to suggest that every terrorist strike in some ways is a failure of denial
[Guest]: or the failure of intelligence would also be incorrect.
[Guest]: Because you have to know, you know, what percentile, what percentage of the overall number of attacks
[Guest]: does this constitute, for which frankly, we sitting out do not have.
[Guest]: But the reason I should take Pulwama seriously is simply because of the scale of what was
[Guest]: accomplished there, right?
[Guest]: It was in the first instance, the first major suicide bombing that we've seen in Kashmir.
[Guest]: It required a truck to be filled with what some 150 kilograms of explosive, early reports
[Guest]: at 300, I think now we're talking about 150.
[Guest]: I mean, I may still be wrong, but I think we're talking about numbers like that of RDX.
[Guest]: You're talking about such a vehicle being prepared, an attack like this being carried
[Guest]: out in the National Highway.
[Guest]: You know, the amount of effort that the Indian Army puts into securing the National Highway
[Guest]: between Jammu and Srinagar every single day of the year is phenomenal.
[Guest]: You know, it's incredible the kind of effort that goes into securing the National Highway.
[Guest]: And if despite that, an attack of this magnitude and this type, a very different kind of an
[Guest]: attack has happened against security forces, then I think it does tell us about certain
[Guest]: salient weaknesses in our sort of denial based apparatus in deterring terrorism.
[Guest]: And in that context, I think, you know, Pulwama needs to be looked into.
[Guest]: I understand, you know, we are in an election season, the government will not want to concede
[Guest]: mistakes and so on.
[Guest]: But unless we are willing to learn from our mistakes, believe me, I mean, you know, we
[Guest]: are not going to be able to strengthen this apparatus, you know, deterrence by denial
[Guest]: only is an incrementally improving game.
[Guest]: You know, again, think of it in the context of Kargil, you know, just when, you know,
[Guest]: the war happened, you know, we had the Kargil Review Committee, which looked into it, they
[Guest]: even published their report with some redactations and so on.
[Guest]: So I think at a minimum, the government should undertake a serious internal investigation
[Guest]: and draw the right lessons instead of getting into this bravado that we sorted everything
[Guest]: out by carrying out airstrikes, sorry, airstrikes as punishment, that still does not take away
[Guest]: the problem of a failure of deterrence by denial in this first case.
[Amit Varma]: And when we talk of deterrence by denial, would you, would it be fair to say that part
[Amit Varma]: of that denial is denying those kind of bad actors a fertile ground which to exploit?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you pointed out that, you know, between 2000 and 2010, you know, the Kashmir situation
[Amit Varma]: was much better.
[Amit Varma]: Now it's much worse.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that what we have done in the last few years is that we've let the
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir situation go completely out of whack, partly because, you know, when you think about
[Amit Varma]: the good ways to fight an insurgency, David Galula's classic book or the learnings of
[Amit Varma]: people like Petraeus and so on after the Iraq disaster, you know, one of the standard learnings
[Amit Varma]: of counter-inturgency always is that you bring the local population to your side.
[Amit Varma]: And in Kashmir, we've, it's just been the other way around, like a very striking image
[Amit Varma]: that strikes me was that, you know, last week after there was this video that was floating
[Amit Varma]: around on Twitter of the Pakistani army taking the captured Abhinandan to their army base
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, and people throwing flowers at the army.
[Amit Varma]: And there was someone who made a snarky tweet about, you know, on this side of the Kashmir
[Amit Varma]: border, they throw flowers at the army, on the other side, they throw stones.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems to me to be very telling that if we cannot have the local population on
[Amit Varma]: our side, our tasks become that much harder.
[Amit Varma]: And part of the exercise of denial that we must do, if it's a deterrence of denial, is
[Amit Varma]: bring the local population to our side, let's win the peace before we can fight the war.
[Guest]: So let me first say that, you know, I don't quite accept that equivalence, which that
[Guest]: tweet is meant to establish.
[Amit Varma]: Sure, it's glib.
[Guest]: It's very glib in as much as, you know, patriotic sentiment in favor of the army is, I mean,
[Guest]: equivalent spades in our country as well.
[Guest]: I mean, you only need to
[Guest]: But not so much in Kashmir.
[Guest]: Not in Kashmir.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Guest]: And that's also, that's why I'm saying the equivalence does not hold.
[Guest]: But I think the point which you're making is an important one, which is to say that
[Guest]: to the extent that there is ferment in Kashmir, there is unrest, there are young people or
[Guest]: older people who are willing to sort of lose their lives rather than continue with the
[Guest]: status quo.
[Guest]: It does create a fertile territory for the insurgency.
[Guest]: Let's remember that the Kashmir insurgency is a historical phenomenon.
[Guest]: It's not existed since the Kashmir problem existed.
[Guest]: It is primarily in its large scale manifestation only existed from the late 1980s.
[Guest]: We know that very well.
[Guest]: We know that that allowed the Pakistanis to then take control of the insurgency, marginalize
[Guest]: the more sort of, you know, local Kashmiri groups from Kashmir, and then push in their
[Guest]: own sort of groups like Lashkar and, you know, others, which have then changed the character
[Guest]: of the insurgency.
[Guest]: And today, it is very clear that if a group like Jayesh is able to sort of carry out an
[Guest]: attack like this, and is able to sort of, you know, actually have a suicide bomber who's
[Guest]: from Kashmir, you know, that that clearly suggests that, you know, we are losing the
[Guest]: plot in terms of the alienation of the people.
[Guest]: And I think there is hardly any way in which anyone can deny that that is a story that
[Guest]: has gone out of control over the last couple of years, particularly.
[Guest]: And I think unless and until we take steps to sort of restore a degree of sort of political
[Guest]: normality, and I'm choosing my words carefully, political normality, right, not a settlement
[Guest]: or something, because all of those are very long term things.
[Guest]: I'm saying that, you know, we have to bring politics back.
[Guest]: Currently, there is no elected government there.
[Guest]: The last elected government was, at least for the people of Kashmir, something of a
[Guest]: disaster, because, you know, it kind of was a coalition which represented very disparate
[Guest]: interests.
[Guest]: On the one hand, you had the BJP, which is calling for abolition of Article 370.
[Guest]: On the other hand, you had, you know, Mahbuba Mufti, who's supposedly, you know, at least
[Guest]: branded by some sections of the Indian, this thing as a soft separatist, right.
[Guest]: So in a sense, someone wants autonomy for Kashmir.
[Guest]: So how that sort of a coalition of opposites could have worked out is something that we've
[Guest]: now seen, right.
[Guest]: I mean, it's led to more further alienation.
[Guest]: And I think the first step towards stemming that alienation is to create conditions for
[Guest]: politics to presume, for elections to be held, for people to believe that at a minimum, they
[Guest]: have an opportunity to take control of their destinies.
[Guest]: And even for the Indian security forces and others to sort of recalibrate the way that
[Guest]: they're thinking about the operations, was not just about sort of terrorist strikes,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: I mean, you think about people coming on to sites where, you know, military encounters
[Guest]: are happening, pelting stones at the armed forces or preventing, you know, making human
[Guest]: shields and so on.
[Guest]: All of which suggests a degree of desperation, which cannot be good news for India at all.
[Amit Varma]: So coming back to the current crisis, you know, this is where we are, there was a terrorist
[Amit Varma]: attack, and we've raised the threshold, we've done these airstrikes, at least domestically,
[Amit Varma]: we've shown that we are strong, we can do anything, and we've sent that message out
[Amit Varma]: that we are willing to escalate and they have responded in kind.
[Amit Varma]: What are the lessons that we can learn from this whole episode, assuming it's over?
[Guest]: I'm speaking of it as if it's in the past tense.
[Guest]: So in the first place, I think, you know, instead of me offering any lessons for anyone,
[Guest]: because we're all living through this, and I think everyone's opinion is quite as good.
[Guest]: I think it may be more useful to ask ourselves what lessons might decision makers on the
[Guest]: Indian and the Pakistani side actually draw from this.
[Guest]: That's pretty much what I mean.
[Guest]: Because what I think is important about a crisis like this is that it is not an isolated
[Guest]: moment, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I'm sure future students of nuclear strategy, etc. will study this as an independent
[Guest]: case study of some kind.
[Guest]: But as a historian, I always find that it's important to remember that these are instances
[Guest]: in time.
[Guest]: The outcomes and learnings that people take away from one crisis sets the background conditions
[Guest]: for the next.
[Guest]: So you know, if we are going to sort of stumble into another crisis at some point, and my
[Guest]: own judgment is that the problem of terrorism is not going to go away in a hurry, then it
[Guest]: is important to understand what is it that both sides are likely to take away.
[Guest]: Now at this point of time, just going purely by the sort of statements that have been given,
[Guest]: for instance, the Prime Minister is on record as having stated that this was simply a pilot
[Guest]: project and that, you know, we are going to sort of scale it up going forward.
[Guest]: Now, that may well be for the consumption of a domestic audience.
[Guest]: But at the same time, it was a similar sort of expectation from Uri 2016 that led to the
[Guest]: use of air power in this first place.
[Guest]: Because last time you concluded that listen, we can do this and the Pakistanis didn't really
[Guest]: sort of have the gumption to respond.
[Guest]: So this time you raise the stakes, right?
[Guest]: And now if you're really you assumption is that what the crisis shows is that we can
[Guest]: continue to do these things.
[Guest]: And that the most important thing is that we've sort of breached the threshold and shown
[Guest]: our ability to do this, then I think you are setting yourself up for more significant crises
[Guest]: in the event of a major attack in the future.
[Guest]: Because then the background expectations both strategically and politically will be that
[Guest]: the best course is to respond and hit back even more strongly if necessary.
[Amit Varma]: And this is then the minimum you can do, you can only go beyond it.
[Guest]: Precisely, right?
[Guest]: Which is why, you know, the airstrikes seemed to be the natural sort of response because,
[Guest]: you know, when it came to Uri, you carried out an action, then you sort of, you know,
[Guest]: went to town in terms of publicizing it, there was a movie which was made, you know, so much
[Guest]: of expectation had been set.
[Guest]: So the next time something is done, you needed to do something which was dramatically at
[Guest]: least commensurate to what had been done.
[Guest]: And of course, this was a more serious attack, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think the lessons that we draw from this draw a certain baseline
[Guest]: of expectation.
[Guest]: On the contrary, if we draw the lesson that listen, yes, we've used airstrikes, we've
[Guest]: shown Pakistan that even terrorist camps deep inside their territory are not immune to punishment
[Guest]: from the Indian side.
[Guest]: But the Pakistanis have also sort of responded in certain ways.
[Guest]: So now the important thing for us is to say that, listen, how do we use the demonstration
[Guest]: of our ability to use force and willingness to use force in order to catalyze a series
[Guest]: of other kinds of things, whether on the diplomatic front, whether on the covert front and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: Then I think we may be thinking in a more sort of constructive way about what we can
[Guest]: get away from this.
[Guest]: Now, if you are Pakistan, what is the kind of lesson that you're going to learn?
[Guest]: I think the lesson that they are learning in some ways is not exactly symmetrical to
[Guest]: the lesson that you're learning, because for instance, you believe that, oh, when the Pakistanis
[Guest]: attempted to respond, we actually struck down an F-16.
[Guest]: Now if an F-15 was really struck down, then the Pakistanis should draw the right lessons.
[Guest]: But looking at everything that they have been saying, which is the only way to judge things
[Guest]: at this point, it very much seems that they are cock-a-whoop.
[Guest]: They believe that, you know, India struck and they struck back and showed the Indians
[Guest]: that they could go toe to toe when it comes to these kinds of things.
[Guest]: And that they have actually now made it absolutely clear that if India wants to escalate, the
[Guest]: Pakistanis will escalate more.
[Guest]: And I think there's something to be said about that.
[Guest]: And again, because, you know, discussions of these issues tend to sort of get entangled
[Guest]: so much in our sort of national passions, you know, where you say that, listen, we got
[Guest]: the better of them.
[Guest]: But just pause for a second.
[Guest]: Think about how the Pakistanis responded.
[Guest]: They respond, you know, we carried out an airstrike after giving a warning some 12 days
[Guest]: after the event happened.
[Guest]: They warned and carried out the airstrike less than 24 hours later.
[Guest]: They carried out their airstrikes in broad daylight.
[Guest]: You carried out airstrikes at 3.30am.
[Guest]: That shows a willingness to take risks or at least to demonstrate a willingness to take
[Guest]: risks, which is significantly higher.
[Guest]: And that is the message that they wanted to convey to you.
[Guest]: And whether we accept the message or not, they believe that that has paid off.
[Guest]: So in a sense, they have shown that they may be weaker, but they have greater propensity
[Guest]: for risk taking.
[Guest]: And if that is the lesson the Pakistanis are going to take, then if India believes that
[Guest]: the response to the next major attack has to be an even stronger response, then the
[Guest]: Pakistanis will run even greater risks.
[Guest]: And that means that we are then going to be setting ourselves up for more deeper crisis
[Guest]: going forward.
[Guest]: So I think the right lessons for the Pakistanis to draw, just like the Indians, would be that,
[Guest]: listen, on this occasion, we actually got lucky.
[Guest]: We got lucky because that Indian pilot was down.
[Guest]: And that gave us a relatively cost-free option to sort of de-escalate the crisis.
[Guest]: Next time around, you may not have a pilot to exercise those options.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it seems to me that we almost had a perfect storm of events in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: both sides got a face-saving way out that they could say that they could take the high
[Amit Varma]: moral ground and they could once say that we responded airstrike to airstrike, and then
[Amit Varma]: they could take the high moral ground and say, we returned your pilot.
[Amit Varma]: And we could, on the other hand, claim that, look, we are so strong, they returned our
[Amit Varma]: pilot and hey, we did the airstrike.
[Amit Varma]: So both sides come out looking good.
[Amit Varma]: But as a historian, I don't know if you like counterfactuals, but how's this?
[Amit Varma]: You know, there was a video where the pilot was almost, was basically being lynched.
[Amit Varma]: And then the Pakistani army came and saved him.
[Amit Varma]: Now assume that a pilot falls and the Pakistani army doesn't get there in time and he's actually
[Amit Varma]: lynched to death.
[Amit Varma]: And that video comes out in India.
[Amit Varma]: What happens?
[Amit Varma]: Because then your prime minister has no option politically, but to escalate further in a
[Amit Varma]: much harsher way.
[Amit Varma]: And then Pakistan also has to respond to that.
[Guest]: Can that spiral out of control?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: That would have been a major provocation.
[Guest]: In fact, I think in even slightly more plausible sort of counterfactual, which is that let's
[Guest]: assume the pilot had died by bailing out.
[Guest]: If an Indian pilot had been killed in action, in this action, instead of the event actually
[Guest]: fortuitously for us playing out that way, I think that could have still created much
[Guest]: stronger sort of pressures on India to respond at least in kind.
[Amit Varma]: Well, the same day there was some kind of helicopter crash and six people died.
[Amit Varma]: Unrelated.
[Guest]: Unrelated.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Even the Pakistanis admitted that it was unrelated.
[Guest]: Given that the Pakistanis were claiming credit for just about everything that was happening
[Guest]: in those 24 hours, I think it was significant that that was a totally unrelated issue.
[Amit Varma]: So it could have spiraled even if the pilot just died in action.
[Guest]: I think it would have created a lot more pressures to at least respond, bring down some Pakistani
[Guest]: plane, you know, do something which would have then shown that, listen, we are not going
[Guest]: to sort of allow this to pass.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Because I mean, again, you know, there is an article written just yesterday by one of
[Guest]: our sort of, you know, most sober and finest sort of military thinkers, General H.S.
[Guest]: Panag, where he says that, you know, the event was a draw, but as a stronger power for India
[Guest]: to settle with a draw is not such a good thing.
[Guest]: Now, you know, I respect General Panag enormously, but I think that kind of lessons, if they
[Guest]: are drawn, then will set us up for continuing sort of use of force, which may not have been
[Guest]: the best way to respond to this crisis.
[Guest]: I think India and Pakistan did the right thing by trying to sort of pull out at a time when
[Guest]: they could both declare victory and exit.
[Guest]: But I think it would be very wrong if both sides believe that future crises will give
[Amit Varma]: those kinds of options.
[Amit Varma]: And to go back to what I glibly said in my introduction to this episode, maybe it was
[Amit Varma]: a draw, but it was a negative sum draw, where both sides lost a little bit in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that there is greater likelihood of costly escalation whenever the next event happens.
[Amit Varma]: So when the, you know, just going forward, like looking at, say, a five-year, even a
[Amit Varma]: five-year period, what is the worst case scenario and what is the best case scenario in terms
[Amit Varma]: of this India-Pakistan conflict with reference to the cross-border terrorism that they promote?
[Guest]: So the best case scenario is that the Pakistanis recalibrate.
[Guest]: They agree that, you know, it is kind of not very wise for them to be able to carry on
[Guest]: this kind of overt support of terrorism.
[Guest]: They think about how to sort of, you know, recalibrate their relationship with the Tanzims
[Guest]: themselves.
[Guest]: In the best case scenario, I would imagine that India manages to restore a degree of
[Guest]: political normality in Jammu and Kashmir that allows us to deal with the disaffection of
[Guest]: some parts of the population in a political way rather than sort of using militarily.
[Guest]: And that, you know, that kind of creates an equilibrium, which is kind of more livable
[Guest]: for all concerned.
[Guest]: The worst case scenario could be, you know, another major terrorist attack, then leading
[Guest]: us to another kind of crisis.
[Guest]: But I think the bottom line point, which I would suggest, at least for me, is worth sort
[Guest]: of remembering as we come out of this crisis and are looking forward, you know, with some
[Guest]: degree of pessimism about the future, is to say that, listen, terrorism is an important
[Guest]: problem.
[Guest]: But it is not a problem that is amenable to being solved, quote unquote, in any straightforward
[Guest]: sense of the word.
[Guest]: Because it is a problem that, as far as India is concerned, is entrenched in the state structures
[Guest]: of another state.
[Guest]: And there are only that many levers that either India or anyone else has to bring about a
[Guest]: complete transformation of that story.
[Guest]: So the important thing, therefore, for us is either to be able to endure the problem
[Guest]: or to be able to manage it to a lesser or a greater extent.
[Guest]: And I think the best thing we can hope for is that we manage it better going forward
[Guest]: by using this entire range of things that we've discussed today, ways of punishment,
[Guest]: ways of denial, diplomacy, all other kinds of things.
[Guest]: At the same time, I think it's also useful to bear in perspective that terrorism is not,
[Guest]: you know, the most significant challenge for India's national security in the medium-term
[Guest]: horizon.
[Guest]: You know, if you were to ask yourself the same question about, you know, in the mid-2000s,
[Guest]: what is the most significant national security challenge?
[Guest]: I think at that point of time, the consensus was that it's left-wing extremism.
[Guest]: It's the Naxalite violence, which had reared its head at that point of time.
[Guest]: And that was a time when the insurgency in JNK was kind of on a downswing, right?
[Guest]: So these kinds of things do happen.
[Guest]: But our challenge is to sort of prepare ourselves strategically for other kinds of competitions,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Asia is seeing a resurgence of great power competition.
[Guest]: There is the spectacular rise of China, you know, there are new kinds of things coming
[Guest]: into place.
[Guest]: There are new technologies.
[Guest]: In that context, I mean, assuming that terrorism somehow is the most important challenge for
[Guest]: our security establishment and allowing ourselves to be sucked into that direction, I think
[Guest]: will counter something of a strategic distraction when we look back at this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Very wise words.
[Amit Varma]: Final question before we sign off from the episode.
[Amit Varma]: If my listeners want to learn more about both this particular conflict and about strategy
[Amit Varma]: in general or game theory and so on, what are the resources or books that you'd recommend
[Amit Varma]: they check out?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, you know, there are many important things which have been sort of written on
[Guest]: terrorism per se, right, in a sense of various kinds of books and so on.
[Guest]: But I think the one kind of important resource that I would suggest is actually a movie called
[Guest]: The Battle of Algiers, which is an iconic movie on terrorism and gives you a sense of
[Guest]: how terrorist organizations think and function and what kinds of constraints that they come
[Guest]: about.
[Guest]: It is actually set in Algeria and it's in the context of this sort of FLN, you know,
[Guest]: sort of insurgency and terrorism against the French sort of occupation of Algeria.
[Guest]: It's a fantastic movie.
[Guest]: It's actually one of the most, you know, scarily realistic movies that you can read about,
[Guest]: watch about terrorism.
[Guest]: So, I'd say that, yeah, that's a good place to start with.
[Guest]: My own favorite book on terrorism is actually a book called Images of Terror by an American
[Guest]: historian called Philip Jenkins.
[Guest]: Because what Jenkins tells you is that terrorism, like many other social phenomena, is actually
[Guest]: a socially constructed problem in a sense that what we make of terrorism depends on
[Guest]: the common understandings and acceptances that we have.
[Guest]: So for instance, you know, why are certain kinds of activities not thought of as terrorist
[Guest]: activities?
[Guest]: You know, bombings of abortion clinic in the American South never get counted as terrorism
[Guest]: by the FBI.
[Guest]: Why is that the case?
[Guest]: I think Jenkins's book is phenomenal because it raises precisely those kinds of deeper
[Guest]: questions which go beyond thinking about it.
[Guest]: If you're thinking for a good place to start on strategy, I would say Lawrence Friedman's
[Guest]: sort of big tomb, Strategy of History.
[Guest]: I know it's a very big book, but you can dip into it.
[Guest]: It's wonderfully readable.
[Guest]: And by one of the most sort of smartest, sensible and most sort of sane, wise observers of strategic
[Guest]: behavior in the 20th century, I'd say that's a great place to start thinking about these
[Guest]: things.
[Amit Varma]: Srinath, thanks so much for coming on the show, I learned a lot today.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: It was great fun.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do hop over to Twitter and follow Srinath
[Amit Varma]: at Srinath Raghava 3.
[Amit Varma]: That's basically his name, only instead of the N, there's a 3 at the end.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And you can browse past episodes of the Seen and the Unseen at SeenUnseen.in or ThinkPragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: How aware do you think you are of your laws and rights?
[Unknown]: Do you look up to laws when you're caught up in situations?
[Unknown]: Do you know what your rights are when you're stuck somewhere bad?
[Unknown]: Well, here's a show that can help you move an inch closer to being aware of what your
[Unknown]: rights are.
[Unknown]: Tune in to Know Your Kanoon with me, Amar Rana.
[Unknown]: This is a podcast meant to answer all your law-related queries.
[Unknown]: Catch Know Your Kanoon every week on the IVM website or the app or anywhere you get your
[Unknown]: podcasts from.